  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telecom Network 2030  
Innovation  Landscape and Opportu nities 
 
 
 
  
Dr. Yim Ling  
 
Innovation Lead  
AI & Data Economy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Major Contributors and Approvers:  
 
Tom Kirkham , Innovation Lead Future Network Technologies  
Tom Fiddian, Head of AIDE programme s 
Esra Kasapoglu , Director of AI & Data Economy  
Will Drury , Executive Director Digital and Technologies  
 
 
 
 
1st Release Version: V1.0 September  2023  
    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  2 
Contents  
1 Telecoms Innovation Powerhouse  ................................ ................................ ...... 3 
2 Major Drivers and Supplies of Future Telecom Innovation  ................................ .. 3 
2.1 Consumer Driver  ................................ ................................ ...........................  4 
2.2 Business/ Society Driver  ................................ ................................ ...............  4 
2.3 Environment Driver  ................................ ................................ .......................  5 
2.4 Technology Innovation Supply  ................................ ................................ ...... 5 
2.5 Governance/ Policy/ Regulation  ................................ ................................ .... 5 
3 Telecom Network 2030 Vision  ................................ ................................ ............  6 
3.1 Future Mobile and Fixed  Infotainment  ................................ ...........................  6 
3.2 AI and Data Network Economy  ................................ ................................ ..... 6 
3.3 Energised and Healthy Ageing Society  ................................ .........................  6 
3.4 Clean Growth  ................................ ................................ ................................  7 
3.5 Telecom Network 2030  Targets  ................................ ................................ .... 7 
4 Telecom Network 2030 Innovation  Opportunities  ................................ ...............  8 
4.1 Wireless Network 2030 Innovation Landscape  ................................ .............  8 
4.2 6G Evolution and Innovation Opportunity  ................................ ......................  9 
4.3 Future Fi xed Network Innovation Opportunity  ................................ .............  11 
5 Accelerating Future Telecom Innovation  ................................ ...........................  13 
5.1 Developing a UK Telecom Network Infrastructure Industry  .........................  13 
5.2 Energising Telecom Network Application Development  ..............................  15 
6 Network 2030 Innovation Supports  ................................ ................................ ... 18 
6.1 Facilitating UK Tel ecom Network 2030 Innovation  ................................ ...... 18 
6.2 Innovation Support Framework  ................................ ................................ ... 20 
 
 
    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  3 
1 Telecom s Innovation Powerhouse  
 
Sociali sation  and connection  are basic  need s for human s to thrive as individuals and 
as a collective . While physical direct contact is  mostly  preferred, it may not be always 
possible. Telecommunication networks provi de a means  to communicate remotely, 
without the parties being in proximity.  Today , telecom networks enable voice, video, 
and data transmission, facilitating human socialisation and information exchange for 
entertainment and work efficiency. Increasingly, t hey also support interactions with 
and among machines, such as computers, sensors, and robo ts.  
 
Telecommunications are part of the national critical infrastructure, playing a vital role 
in our daily social and business life activities. Moreover, through the advancements 
of telecom technology, such as the evolution from 1G to 5G, telecom network s have 
evolved using internationally agreed standards to address the increasing digital 
demands within our lives  and enhancing our national productivity.  
 
As a country , the UK  recognises the importance of technology advancement to our 
economic and social development. The  Prime Minister announced the intention for 
the UK to be a science superpower by 2030, placing science, innovation, and 
technology at the heart of the governments  vision , highlighting f ive priority 
technologies1. Telecoms is one of the prio rities, together with Quantum technologies, 
Engineering biology, AI, and Semiconductors.  
 
This paper discusses the telecom network innovation landscape and the 
opportu nities that presented in the  coming telecom technology evolution.  The 
timeframe considere d is to 2030. Every generation of network evolution, such as 
from 4G to 5G, took about 10 years, starting from defining  the vision, detailing the 
requirements, carrying out research, to standardisation, planning, and 
implementation. Therefore, while looking  the future, the innovation requirements 
from now to 2030  are also highlighted . 
 
 
2 Major Drivers and Suppl ies of Future Telecom 
Innovation  
 
The demands of advanced telecommunication networks are constantly evolving, 
from initial simple message commun ication to voice and now high -speed real -time 
data communication. The primary aim of advancing the telecom networks is to 
enhance our life -experience in 2030, while doing so assist ing the development s of 
sustainable technologi es that boost the growth of the economy.  
 
 
 
1 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk -international -technology -strategy/the -uks-
international -technology -strategy    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  4 
Network evolution is a continuous process of innovation and improvement. It is 
driven by the changing market demands, technological advancements, societ al and 
social trends. It is guided by the vision to creat e an intelligent , ubiquitous, secured , 
and sustainable network that can connect every one and every thing.  There are many  
drivers of telecom evolution  that can be catalogued  as coming from consumer  user, 
business, and society, as well as from environment  conservation . 
 
 
2.1 Consumer Driver  
 
The developme nt of communication networks and electronic consumer products are 
interrelated and create new opportunities for the future. Many electronic consumer 
products, both new and existing, depend on communication networks that can offer 
fast, reliable, secure, and low -latency data transmission. For example , new products 
such as 4K/8K TV, VR HMD, Apple Vision Pro, require high -speed and broadband 
video streaming capabilities  to create the enhanced user experience .  
 
Communication networks are constantly improving t o meet these demands while 
also stimulating new product innovations. The latest wireless network for example 
can connect a large number of  low-power products , which then enables the 
development of many new IoT devices,  connecting  such things as smart meters, 
home fridges, etc.  
 
Future products, such as driverless car, require communication networks that can 
deliver even higher performance and near -real-time data exchange. Furthermore, 
the creation of the cyber world such as  Metaverse  and Digi tal Twin  will need 
communication networks that can support seamless interaction between virtual and 
physical worlds.  
 
 
2.2 Business/ Society Driver  
 
5G ultra -low latency and reliable networks aim to serve consumers as well as 
businesses. Many initiatives are a lready in place to take advantage of these new 5G 
capabilities, including initiatives linked to the concepts of the Smart City, Smart Port, 
Smart Factory, etc.  
 
By 2030, a new age of the digital economy will emerge, where everything that needs 
connection will be connected. Telecom networks in 2030 will be the main platforms 
and infrastructures for business communication, collaboration, and commerce, 
leading to high efficiency and high productivity. Moreover, telecom network 2030 will 
support government ser vices, such as intelligent transport, crowd management, 
emergency, disaster , and crisis managements, and many others . 
 
 
   
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  5 
2.3 Environment Driver  
 
The urgent requirement of environment al sustainability  is becoming more recognized  
both within the industry and gov ernments that regulate it . From the process of 
consumer device manufacture to the operation of radio antennae the telecom 
industry must  consider  its impact on the environment. Reducing the amount of 
carbon used in supply chains to the development and utilisation of energy efficient 
hardware are two examples where  reduced carb on emissions are targeted.  
Moreover, utilisation of network technology  has the responsibility to help other 
industries to achieve their  Environmental, social, and c orporate governance (ESG)  
and reduce their environmental impacts and carbon emissions.  
 
 
2.4 Technology  Innovation  Supply  
 
Technology evolution is accelerating all the times since industry evolution  and as 
companies compete within a global marketplace . It is commonly recognised that 
technology is the only long -term solution to support the growth of a national  
economy. Telecom evolution can come from many  areas, from the inventions of 
physical materia l such as hollow fibre , to radio frequency  component, software radio, 
edge subsystem, platform, and to end -to-end orchestration  system, integrating  some  
other innovations in the fields such as AI, Quantum Computing, and Semiconductor . 
 
 
2.5 Governance/ Policy/ Regulation  
 
One of the main supplies of development towards a better and more sustainable 
society is government policy and regulation. They help encourage strategic 
innovation ensuring that the innovations are efficient, productive, and  eco-friendly. 
As a driver of economic growth many countries and regions around the world have 
launched initiatives to become leaders in technologies to deliver the future of 
telecoms.  
 
For example, in Europe, there are the Europe’s Digital Decade: digital targets for 
20302 and the 6G Research and Innovation Programme3. In the US, there are the 
Next G Alliance4, the NYU Wireless Industrial Affiliates Program5, and cooperation in 
Advanced Wireless Communications  with Finland6. UK have similar ambitions and 
aim to be a technology p owerhouse, as defined in the Long -term Science and 
 
2 https://commission.europa.eu/strategy -and-policy/priorities -2019 -2024/europe -fit-digital -
age/europes -digital -decade -digital -targets -2030_en  
3 Europe launches the second phase of its 6G Research and Innovation Programme | Shaping 
Europe’s digital future (europa.eu)  
4 https://www.nextgalliance.org/  
5 https://wireless.engineering.ny u.edu/industry -affiliates/  
6 https://www.state.gov/joint -statement -of-the-united -states -and-finland -on-cooperation -in-advanced -
wireless -communications/    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  6 
Technology Framework7, the Wireless Infrastructure Strategy8, and the International 
Technology Strategy9. 
 
3 Telecom Network 2030 Vision  
 
Four core components make up the telecom network 2030 vision : 
• Future Mobile and Fixed Infotainment  
• AI and Data  Network  Economy  
• Energi sed and Healthy Ageing Society  
• Clean Growth  
 
 
3.1 Future Mobile and Fixed Infotainment  
 
Telecom n etwork 2030 will provide seamless and immersive experiences that can 
enhance lives, offer en tertainment, and facilitate access to information. It will keep 
user connected to the content, service, people, and machine  that matter and benefit  
to the user. Moreover, telecom network 2030 will also enable users to interact 
seamlessly between the new vi rtual world and the physical world. Whether it is 
playing a cloud -based game on a device , watching a live concert in virtual reality, 
talking to a digital assistant on a driverless car, or socialising in the cyber world, the 
telecom network 2030 will support the future of mobile and fixed infotainment.  
 
 
3.2 AI and Data Network  Economy   
 
Artificial  intelligence and data are the key drivers of the digital economy. They enable  
creation of  faster, smarter, and more efficient solutions for various challenges and 
opportunities. Telecom n etwork 2030 will leverage AI and data to build an 
autonomous network  that can be self-organize d, self -optimize d, and self -healing. In 
addition , it will  also us e AI and data to support connected IoT devices in transforming 
various industries  and organisations , in the sectors such as  manufacturing,  
agriculture, transportation, government services, and many more. Telecom n etwork 
2030 will  harness the power of AI and data to create new value and improve 
business efficienc y. 
 
 
3.3 Energi sed and Healthy Ageing Society  
 
The ageing society poses several challenges for the economy and society. It 
requires new ways of increasing productivity, enhancing well -being, and ensuring 
 
7 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk -science -and-technology -framework/the -uk-science -
and-technology -framework  
8 UK Wireless Infrastructure St rategy - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)  
9 The UK's International Technology Strategy - GOV.UK (w ww.gov.uk)    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  7 
quality of life. Telecom n etwork 2030 will help to  overcome these challenges by 
providing future te lecom solutions that can boost productivity, efficiency, and 
innovation in various domains. It can also support for example  leading -edge mobile 
and fixed health care solutions that can improve health outcomes, reduce costs, and 
increase access to care for the ageing population.  
 
 
3.4 Clean Growth  
 
Climate change is one of the most urgent issues facing humanity today. It requires 
collective action from all stakeholders to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
achieve  green growth . The Telecom industry’s Net Zero  programme  aims  to take 
action to reduce the network s’ carbon footprint and achieve  net zero by 2030 . 
Telecoms is also part of the ICT solutions that can empower  industrial 
decarbonisation by enabling smart energy management, green transportation,  etc. 
The aim is to reduce their environmental impact and contribute to clean growth.   
 
 
3.5 Telecom Network 2030  Targets  
 
Some of the Telecom Network 2030  targets are:  
• Providing full mobility and broadband 
capabilities to support new 
Infotainments. Seamless experience 
between physical and virtual world  
• 5G and 5.5G UK nation -wide coverage 
and new area coverages; Standalone 5G 
to all populated areas by 203010 
• Increasing IoT devices with Everything 
required connections get connected. 
Gigabit -broadband nationwide by 203011 
• Supporting new age of Intelligent Data 
Economy - smart manufacturing, 
transportation, public services,  etc. 
• Lift productivity to meet challenges of 
slow growth, ag eing population, and 
rising energy costs  
• Telecom Net Zero and ICT solutions can empower other industries to reduce 
carbon emission; ICT has the potential to hold global CO 2 emissions in 2030 
at 2015 levels12 
 
 
 
10 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk -wireless -infrastructure -strategy/uk -wireless -
infrastructure -strategy  
11 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/levelling -up-the-united -kingdom  
12 https://www.bt .com/bt -plc/assets/documents/digital -impact -and-sustainability/our -approach/our -
policies -and-reports/ict -carbon -reduction -eu.pdf  
  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  8 
4 Telecom N etwork 2030 Innovation  Opportunities  
 
This section will explore the current and future trends of wireless and fixed network 
development s and examine the potential innovations in 6G networks  through to 
2030 . 
 
4.1 Wireless Network 2030 Innovation Landscape  
 
Wireless network infrastructure is the foundation of the digital economy. In addition 
to mobility, i t enables the delivery of high -quality, reliable, and secure connectivity to 
various devices, applications, and services. Network infrastructure is constantly 
innovating to meet the evolving needs and expectations of its users. It also evolves 
with the purposes of improving its own network efficiency, optimizing the resources, 
reducing the costs, and increasing the agility.  
 
 
 
 
There are two main sources of future telecom innovations:  
• Network Infrastructure  Equipment  Innovations (enabling new capabilities, 
more efficiency, etc)  
• End-User Service Innovations ( enabling 2C Infotainment, 2B work efficiency, 
2G digital transformation, etc)  
 
Wireless network infrastructure consists of Radio Access Network (RAN), Transport 
(including Backhaul), Core network, and OSS/BSS. Innovations can be related to 
any of these infrastructure elements, as well as some of the late st technologies in 
Cloud Edge, SDN, NFV, Slicing, and Cloud Core.  
 
 uture  ireless Innovation Landscape
 emar : t e a o e is not a definiti e list    ut rat er are potential areas of inno ation
D : Digital  ransformation      :  o  o  ar et     :  i ed  ireless  ccess   m    : massi e  ultiple  nput  ultiple  utput      :  adio 
 ccess  et or          :  peration s   usiness  upport  ystem    D :  oft are Defined  et or      :  et or   unction  irtuali a tion  
   :  e icle to E eryt ing    ed ap: educed  apa ility      :  on  errestrial  et or  (suc  as  atellite    ig   ltitude  latforms     ) ireless  et or        nno ation  pportunities
 nd  ser  ervice Innovation
 onsumer      usiness     Network In rastructure Innovation
    ac  aul  ore         
Edge  loud  D       licing  ore  loud
 ri ate  o ile  et or  (   )
 eutral  ost  et or 
Digital   in pen        pplication
 et or 
 oint  ensing and 
 ensor  et or s      
 ntegration        ...        
m    
 entimetre    u       
  ree  pace  ptic
 et or  of
 et or s ural  o erage
 utonomous 
 et or s (  )      eta erse  
 ologram  ireless
 uantum
 ecurity mart  ity   ealt   ransport  ..Edge  omputing
 tandalone (  )  et or   
 .  
   era it  road and
 et or  reen    ecure        ( nfotainment    or  efficiency   D ..) ( e   er ice  ntroduction   net or  efficiency   fast    ..)
 econfigura le 
 urfaces ndustry  .   loud     
De ice  ard are  oft are  er ice  pplication  omponent  latform ltra 
m     ed ap  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  9 
5G is the first mobile system that aims to serve not only the general consumer 
market but , also business and organisation. The end -user service and application 
innovations cover all segment s, including 2C, 2H, 2B, and 2G markets.  
 
Wireless network evolution is a continuous process of research and standardisation . 
Mobile network has evolved from the 1G analogue voice network, 2G digital voice 
and SMS, 3G circuit and packet switches, to 4G dat a network, and 5G 2C and 2B 
data network s. Some of the key topics of 5G and 5.5G evolution include: FWA, 
Cloud VR, Private Mobile Network (PMN), massive MIMO, Edge Computing, Rural 
Coverage, Neutral Host Network, Open RAN, Standalone (SA) Network, V2X/ UAV , 
Digital Twin, Industry 4.0+, Smart City/ Heath/Transport/ Education/ Agriculture 
applications , and reduced capability (RedCap , also known as NR -Light ). 
 
6G research has been started . Some of the hot topics of 6G  are: XR/ Metaverse/ 
Hologram wireless, Sensing and sensor network s, Terrestrial  Network and Non -
Terrestrial Network ( TN-NTN) Integration, Terahertz/ mmWave,  Free-space Optic , 
Terabit Broadband Network, Network of Networks, Reconfigurable Intelligent 
Surfaces, Ultra -massive MIMO, and Quantum Security Network.  
 
Wireless network is  in sync and converging with other technology advancements. 
For example, there is an increasing tendency of using AI for applications over 
networks and for an autonomous network. AI will be used in 5G and 5.5G networks 
and it is expected that 6G will widel y incorporate the use of AI technology. Also, it is 
commonly accepted that all the infrastructure and application developments will have 
to fall under the green and secure framework.  The network s will have to be power 
efficien t themselves as well as have t he capabilities to support other business es and 
industr ies in their green cred entials. Telecom networks  also need to be inherently 
secure d and continuously to be a major part of the critical infrastructure . 
 
Potential areas of telecom innovation can come f rom but not limited to:  
• Component (antenna, RF unit, beam -forming module, etc)  
• Device (IoT, 5G Wifi router, etc)  
• Hardware (MEC server, base station, etc)  
• Software (Radio Intelligent Controller, device management, etc)  
• Platform (cloud, edge, IoT, etc)  
• Service (integration, design, data analysis, operation, etc) 
• Application (smart city, port, education, health, etc)  
 
 
4.2 6G Evolution  and Innovation  Opportunity  
 
6G evolution is the next generation of wireless communication technology that will 
build on the a chievements of 5G and provide extreme connectivity for various 
applications and services. 6G evolution will incorporate AI intelligence, tera 
networks, network of networks, green and secure technologies, as well as enhance   
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  10 
the existing 5G features of eMBB, mMTC, and uRLLC. Six U sage Scenarios are 
identified  by ITU13: 
• Immersive Communication (an extension of eMBB)  
• Massive Communication  (an extension of mMTC)  
• HRLLC (Hyper Reliable & Low -Latency Communication – an extension of 
uRLLC)  
• Ubiquitous Connectivi ty 
• Integrated AI and Communication  
• Integrated Sensing and Communication  
 
And four design principles , applicable to all usage scenarios , are defined as : 
• Sustainability  
• Connecting the unconnected  
• Ubiquitous intelligence  
• Security/ privacy/ resilience  
 
 
 
ITU and the  wireless  industry are in the process of defining  the 6G requirements of 
IMT-2030. Below shows some of the key char acteristics that are expected in 6G 
evolution :  
▪ High Data Rate:  The peak downlink data rate will exceed 100 Gbps, enabling 
ultra-fast transmission of large amounts of data.  The up link peak data will also 
be enhanced to larger than 10 G bps. 
▪ High Capacity:  The network capacity will be 100 times higher than 5G, 
supporting massive data traffic and concurrent users.  
 
13 https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -R/study -groups/rsg5/rwp5d/imt -2030/Pages/default.aspx  
    volution
  i    ata  ate  pea  do nlin    
     ps  uplin       p s
  i    apacit         
   ps  overa e  ver w ere    D 
co erage   in t e s ies   space and 
under ater
   treme Low Latenc  E E    ms
  i    elia ilit         
  lwa s  ecured   rust   ecurity and 
 esilience
  ensin   apa ilit     ig   recision 
 ositioning :      cm
  assive  onnected  evices (     m 
  m )
 Low  ner   and  ost  de ices and 
infrastructure onsumer
 ndustry
 o ernment usiness
    onnectivit  
   urrent proposals   to  e defined  y              and     
 ource:               rame or  ( une     )  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  11 
▪ Gbps Coverage E verywhere:  The network coverage will extend to three -
dimensional spaces, including the skies, space, and underwater, ensuring 
seamless connectivity in any environment.  
▪ Extreme Low Latency:  The end -to-end latency will be less than 1ms, 
enabling real -time an d interactive applications that require high 
responsiveness and accuracy.  
▪ High Reliability:  The network reliability will reach five nines (99.999%)  or 
above , ensuring minimal errors and failures in critical scenarios.  
▪ Always Secured:  The network will provi de trust, security, and resilience for 
all users and devices, protecting them from cyberattacks and privacy 
breaches.  
▪ Sensing Capability & High Precision Positioning:  The network will have 
the ability to sense the physical environment and provide high prec ision 
positioning for users and devices, in the resolution of 1  to 10cm, enabling new 
applications such as augmented reality and autonomous driving.  
▪ Massive Connected Devices:  The network will support up to 10 0 million 
connected devices per square kilometr e, enabling the Internet of Things and 
smart city applications.  
▪ Low Energy and Cost:  The network and devices will consume low energy 
and cost, making them more sustainable and affordable.  
 
6G evolution will serve various sectors and domains, such as consum er, business, 
industry, and government, and enable new possibilities and opportunities for 
innovation and development.  
 
 
4.3 Future Fixed Network Innovation  Opportunity  
 
Future fixed network innovations are the key to enabling a wide range of new 
applications and services that require high -speed, low -latency, secure , and reliable 
connectivity. It has the characteristic of determin istic experience that is more difficult 
to achieve in a mobile network. While 5G is moving on to 5.5G and 6G, the evolution 
of fixed network is also progressing from Fixed 5G (F5G) to F5.5G and F6G14, 
whereas Wi-Fi is moving from wifi6, to wifi7 and wifi815. These technologies aim to 
provide seamless and high-speed  experiences for users across different domains 
and scenarios.  
 
 
14 https://www.etsi.org/images/files/ETSIWhitePapers/etsi_wp_41_FSG_ed1.pdf  
15 https://standards.ieee.org/beyond -standards/the -evolution -of-wi-fi-technology -and-standards/    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  12 
 
 
Some of the applications that can benefit from future fixed network innovations are 
Cloud VR/AR/XR/Desktop,  wireless metaverse, smart city, digital twin, internet of 
sensors, hologram communication, and many more. These applications require high 
bandwidth , low latency, and high quality of service to deliver immersive and realistic 
experiences. For example, Cloud VR/AR/XR  can enable users to access virtual or 
augmented reality content, without the need for expensive or bulky devices. Smart 
city can leverage  the massive amount of data collected by sensors and cameras to 
improve urban planning, management, and services. Digital twins can create a 
virtual replica  of physical objects or systems, allowing for remote monitoring, control, 
and optimization. The inte rnet of sensors can connect billions of devices and sensors 
to the cloud, enabling new applications such as smart agriculture, environmental 
monitoring, and industrial automation. Hologram communication can enable users to 
interact with each other and object in 3D projection, creating a sense of presence 
and intimacy.  
 
Some of the major innovation topics of Fixed Network 2030  include:  
• 10s Gigabit Broadband for home  and organisation  
o mmWave Wifi  
o High-density Wifi MIMO  
o Satellite LEO/ MEO Internet  
o FTTx ( Fibre To The Everything and Everywhere)  
 
• All-Optical Network  
o All-optical processing/ switching  
o New hollow core fibre wavelengths and transceiver. Coherent 
Detection.  
o Flexible Optical Network carrier/ multiplexing/ channel  
 
 uture  i ed Network Innovations
 
     
 ifi   
 loud  ompute 
and  anagement                                  
                                  
                                    
                                   
                     
                                     
                        
                           
                                  
                                    
          
         
         
          
            
            
       
        
   ll  ptical  et or   s  iga it 
 road and for 
 ome  organisation          
                     
                            
                                 ecure   elia le  Deterministic    ntelligent E perience  pplication
   :   e  ift   eneration  i ed  et or    ringing  i re to E ery  ere and E eryt ing (E   )  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  13 
• Cloud Compute and Management  
o Edge Compute/ Slicing/ Deterministic  
o Energy Efficiency Network  
o Integrated Power Computing  
o Autonomous (Intend based) Network  
o Network -based sensing systems  
 
 
5 Accelerat ing Future Telecom Innovation  
 
To create and be recognised as a future telecom technology powerhouse, the UK 
would benefit from accelerat ing the pace of developments in both the infrastructure 
and the application. There is strength in the UK academic base which can support 
industry in specific develop ment opportun ities. In this section, we will analyse the 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of UK in these two areas 
and discuss how to develop the telecom infrastructure equipment industry and how 
to energi se the application development s.  
 
 
5.1 Develop ing a UK Telecom Network Infrastructure Industry  
 
The global telecom  network  equipment  market  is expected to grow rapidly from £1 
trillion in 2020 to £2.4 trillion by 203016. The UK has strengths in this market, such as 
leading acad emic research, leading telecom operators, well established telecom 
labs, and favourable finance and regulation. However, the UK might face some 
challenges in fostering the telecom equipment  industry , such as debatably lacking a 
major  native  telecom infrast ructure vendor headquartered in the country and 
arguably not having the necessary supply chain eco -system in the UK, for such 
things as communication  chipset, router, computer, and cloud servers , being made 
in UK . 
 
To address the lack of a large -scale UK infrastructure provider , an opportunity exists 
in the diversification of the network and support for new innovators into the supply 
chain. To support this, the UK has set out its future telecom innovation strategy and 
is looking to seizing the opportunities presented by the open network initiatives, the 
UK supply chain diversification strategy, along with the technical opportunities within 
the upcoming 5.5G , 6G, and non-terrestrial communication s evolutions .  
 
With a st rong research base , the UK is well positioned to create innovation that can 
be exploited to grow new infrastructure providers for the telecom networks of the 
future.  This is well supported by UK government yet  presents an opportunity for the 
innovation to be accelerated so that it can grow and scale up in its early stages. 
Highlighting the key technological areas where the UK can develop  an early  
competitive edge and leadership  is essential.  
 
16 https://www.ericsson.com/assets/local/5g/the -5g-for-business -a-2030 -compass -report -2019.pdf    
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  14 
 
Research efforts o f 6G and Telecom Network 2030 are already taken places  in North 
America, Europe, China, Korea, and Japan , aiming to be  the leaders in creating  6G 
applications and services, as well as the technologies that will set the global 
standards.  Meanwhile, each reg ion or country has its own strengths and advantages 
in different aspects of the 5G/5.5G ecosystem.  Below investigates  particular ly the 
situations in United States and Europe.  
 
 
 
The US has a strong presence in the radio chip industry, with companies such as 
Qualcomm, Intel, Xilinx, and Nvidia leading the market. The US also dominates the 
server computing industry, with companies such as Dell, HPE, and Compaq 
providing high -performance solutions. Moreover, the US is home to the major cloud 
infrastructure pr oviders, such as AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud, who offer 
scalable and reliable platforms for 5G/5.5G applications and services.  These cloud 
hyperscalers are also increasingly getting into the telecom infrastructure markets , 
leverag ing their scales and finances, starting from core and edge cloud s and to the 
whole end -to-end infrastructure.  
 
In contrast, the EU excels in the end -to-end telecom infrastructure  equipment  
industry, with companies such as Ericsson and Nokia providing comprehensive 
solutions for 5G/5.5G networks. The EU has also been active in promoting open 
network and diversified supply chain strategies, as well as supporting research and 
innovation projec ts through initiatives such as Horizon Europe.  
 
 
  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  15 
The UK stands out in academic research, including telecom, software, and AI. 
Further, the  K  as some of t e  orld’s leading universities and research institutes 
in these fields, such as Cambridge University , Imperial College London, and Alan 
Turing Institute. The UK also hosts some of the largest telecom operators in the 
world, such as Vodafone Group and BT Group, who are conducting leading product 
and solution research for future telecom technologies.  
 
Thus , UK has a  great opportunity to develop future network infrastructure equipment 
industry harnessing  academic research strengths coupled to  operational experience 
of large telecom networks. To develop the telecom infrastructure providers in UK, the 
followin g approaches can be considered :  
 
• Leverage on academic research in telecom and software . The UK has a 
strong academic research base in telecom and software, which can provide with 
cutting -edge knowledge and innovation to help harness scientific innovation in 
the domain. There are many large opportunities for the UK to foster collaboration 
around telecom technologies through innovation among universities, industry, 
and government, to support the transfer of research outcomes to the market.  
 
• Learn from experi ence of large telecom operators . The UK has some of the 
largest and most advanced telecom operators in the world, which can offer 
valuable insights and best practices on how to design, build, manage , and 
operate  network infrastructure. Through  leverag ing experience to integrate 
innovative infrastructure  equipment solutions  into the market , UK organisations 
can address the challenges and needs of telecom operators worldwide.  
 
By developing its own telecom network infrastructure industry,  the UK can create 
competitive advantage , ensure national security , and encourage econom ic growth , 
while  contribute to the global telecom sector.  
 
 
5.2 Energi sing Telecom Network Application Development  
 
5G and beyond have the potential  to enable revolutionary applications that can 
benefit individuals, businesses, and governments. However, the advantages of 5G 
are not yet fully realised by consumers or businesses.  
 
The UK has some strengths in harnessing the opportunities of 5G, such as an open 
society that allows for a variety of applications, and a strong venture capital market 
for tech companies ($14.9B in 2020)17. The UK also leads Europe in AI investment 
and has well -established 5G Testbeds & Trials, in addition to a  large software 
industry with a pool of skilled software and AI engineers. However, the UK, in fact 
the whole industry,  also faces some challenges, such as  a lack of standard ised 
methods  and application blueprints  of deploying 5G in various industrial sectors.   
 
 
17 https://dealroom.co/blog/tech -nation -report -2021 -the-future -uk-tech-built   
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  16 
One of the challenges of developing and deploying innovative applications over 5G 
and beyond is the business model and the barriers to fast adoption. Different 
stakeholders, such as network operators, vendors, integrators, and verticals, may 
have different  incentives and expectations from the network. For example s: 
 
• Operators may not find it attractive to only charge for traffic, if they need to 
invest in network infrastructure and maintenance  
• Vendors may not find it overwhelming to only provide a small net work, with a 
handful of radio base stations and local infrastructure solutions.  
• Integrators may not find it appealing to provide customisation services, as 
they need to deal with complex and diverse requirements from different 
verticals.  
• Verticals may not be willing to adopt the network solutions, as they may face 
large initial investment and possible high total cost of ownership (TCO), as 
well as potential operation disruption  with not so clear benefits  
 
However, it is well understood that the use of latest telecom network technology can 
increase long-term productivity , competitiveness, security, and agility of business  
and facilitate digital transformation of the society as whole. Therefore, there is a 
rationale to foster innovation of the ap plication developments  over 5G and 5.5G 
network . To be able to consider fully the areas of application development, we first 
will discuss  the business model s of different architecture options of the 5G and 5.5G 
private mobile network .   
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  17 
 
 
1. Private  network over public network with slicin g: This model uses network 
slicing to create virtual networks over a shared public network infrastructure. This  
can offer readily available wide -area coverage , scalability,  and reliability  to the 
users as well as is a relative low -cost solution . For example, this model can be 
used for public services such as police or ambulance, of which slicing  will ensure  
high priority, low latency, and high security  for the user . These blue light services 
need wide area coverage th at is already provided by the public mobile network. 
Moreover, network slicing can guarantee the quality of service and security that 
they require. This solution also has the advantage of using the licensed radio 
spectrum of the public mobile network opera tor.  
 
2. Private network with public network control and local MEC : This model uses 
Multi -access Edge  Computing (MEC) to create local private networks that are 
controlled by a public network operator. This can offer more proximity, bandwidth, 
and intelligenc e for local applications or services , as well as high local data 
security . For example, this model can be used for smart manufacturing or smart 
campus, which require high data rate, low latency, local real-time processing , and 
local data security . 
 
  
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  18 
3. Standalone private network : This model uses a dedicated network 
infrastructure that is owned and operated by a private entity. This can offer more 
autonomy, security, and optimisation for isolated applications or services. For 
example, this model can be us ed for large oil and gas field  plant  or underground 
mining  site, which require high availability, reliability,  safety , and security of data . 
Although it is called a standalone network, some of the facilities, such as  a radio 
base station can  be share -used  with the public network . By doing so, this will  
allow private user to seamlessly access to public network services , as well as 
enable  public user  to use and share some cost of  the equipment in the private 
network . Further more , in this case, network slicing  can be implemented to ensure 
there is  no compr omise of either the service quality or network data security  to 
the private network user . 
 
There are potential innovations in the following three areas of application 
development:  
 
1. Public services . Mobile application developments for the local authority can 
improve the efficiency and quality of public services, such as ambulance, fire, and 
police. For example, 5G technology can be used to enable real -time communication 
and data transmission between em ergency vehicles and control centres, to allow 
remote diagnosis and treatment of patients. These blue light services need wide 
area coverage that is already provided by the public mobile network. Moreover, 
network slicing can guarantee the quality of servi ce and security that they require. 
This solution also has the advantage of using the licensed radio spectrum of the 
public mobile network operator.  
 
2. Neutral host network . In this case, application developments can enable for 
example vehicle -to-infrastru cture (V2I) communication, such as smart traffic 
management, road safety, and environmental monitoring. The neutral host network 
model, where a single network infrastructure is shared by multiple operators and 
service providers, can reduce costs, increase coverage, and allow interoperability.  
 
3. Private network industrial  blueprints . Mobile applications can be developed 
that can enhance the productivity and performance of industrial sectors, such as 
manufacturing, mining, and logistics. The concept of stan dardisation into a fixed 
menu of use case applications for different vertical businesses should be promoted. 
These application templates facilitate easier deployment and allow enterprises  in 
various industry  to choose the most suitable  standard  application s for their needs.  
 
6 Network 2030 Innovation  Support s 
 
6.1 Facilitat ing UK Telecom Network 2030 Innovation  
 
To achieve the vision of Telecom Network 2030, both the development and 
commercialisation of innovative applications and services  as well as the 
development of advanced infrastructure equipment  are important .   
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  19 
 
Innovate UK, as part of UK Research and Innovation  (UKRI) , together with 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) , Catapults , local and 
regional governments,  industrial orga nisations , and universit ies have already 
established several industry and academic telecom labs across the country, which  
provide  support s to the deployment and testing of open and interoperable network 
technologies, such as ORAN, RIC, MEC, etc. These labs can also support the 
application development for various domains, such as manufacturing, health care, 
etc. 
 
In addition, though Department f or Science, Innovation and Technology ’s (DSIT’s) 
Future Telecom s programme , EPSRC and Innovate UK will support  the 
establishment of academic research hubs across the country, which can foster new 
infrastructure equipment development, such as V2X netw ork, NTN -TN, sensing 
network, AI, reflective device, etc. These hubs can also enable new applications and 
services, such as immersive XR, 3D gaming, driverless car, virtual world integration, 
etc. 
 
 
 
 
As part of delivery of the Future Telecom s programme, Innovate UK , will run several 
funding challenge competition s, based on well -established methods , to support 
future telecom innovative projects by companies .  
 
Furthermore , Innovate UK  is working with the C eltic-Next programme18, which is part 
of the EUREKA Cluster19, in international ly collaborative R&D projects  focusing on 
next-generation communications for the digital society . Successful project proposal  
 
18 https://www.celticnext.eu/about -celtic -next/  
19 https://www.celticnext.eu/eureka -clusters -programme/  
Telecom Network 2030 Innovation  upports
 pplication 
de elopment 
( anufacturing   
 ealt   etc) ccelerate 
 pplication 
 evelopment and 
 ommerciali ation
 pen and 
 nteropera le 
 et or  (      
      E   etc) ccelerate 
In rastructure 
  uipment 
 evelopment e   pplications 
( mmersi e      D 
 aming  Dri erless  ar   
 irtual  orld  ntegration 
etc) 
 e   nfrastructure 
(    net or       
     ensing      
 eflecti e De ice   etc) a e uses of 
 ndustry and 
 egional La sLe erage on 
 cademic 
 esearc  and La s
   .    
 tart  mall  ut  im  ig ndustrial  lueprints to  ross  ndustries
     .       
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  20 
to Celtic -Next will get a  Label . The label can then be used , to indicate that the project 
has been technically assessed by Celtic -Next, in the application of Innovate UK 
funding challenges . 
 
 
6.2 Innovation Support Framework  
 
To foster innovation , the following areas are important across the UK:  
 
1. Lab Facilities : Continue to consolidate  and grow testbed and trial lab facilities  
that can support innovative projects , for new future telecom infrastructure 
development,  interoperability test, and telecom application development and 
integration.   
 
2. Vertical Industry Applicat ion Blueprints : identif y key target ver ticals, such as 
healthcare, education, manufacturing, and entertainment , which  can benefit from 
5G and other telecom  technologies , and deliver a blueprint  application solution to 
each  target vertical. Application could  be first developed as a standard best 
practice for a specific industry, but it should also have the market potentials to 
apply to other industries  – cross market is a big opportunity.  
 
3. Open Network Infrastructure Equipmen t Development : Continue d promotion 
of 5G/5.5.5G development, with a focus on open network and diversified supply 
chain strategies. Access for  innovators to get entry to the UK open telecom 
infrastructure ecosystem  is important . New infrastructure developme nt can start 
with pilot projects and trials but needs  to have  a clear vision and roadmap for 
large -scale deployment and adoption.  
 
4. 6G/F6G research : Development of a 6G ecosystem, encouraging cross domain 
tec nology con ergence and le eraging on t e  K’s e cellent researc  
capabilities, industry -university collaboration programs, and standardi sation 
efforts.  
 
 
 s t e  K’s inno ation agency   nno ate  K ’s mission  is to help UK businesses 
grow through the development and commercialisation of new products, processes, 
and services, supported by an outstanding innovation ecosystem that is agile, 
inclusive, and easy to navigate.  Innovate UK  will continue  to inspire, involve , and 
invest to support innovation.     
  
www. innovateuk .ukri.org  21 
List of Abbreviation  
 
Abbreviation  Definition  
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AR Augmented Reality  
BSS Business Support System  
DSIT  Department for Science, Innovation and Technology  
eMBB  Enhanced Mobile Broadband  
EPSRC  Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council  
ESG  Environmental, Social, and corporate Governance  
FTTx  Fibre   o   e “ ” ( ome  room  etc)  
FWA  Fixed Wireless Access  
HMD  Head Mounted Device  
HRLLC  Hyper Reliable and Low -Latency Communications  
ICT  Information and Communications Technology  
IMT International  Mobile  Telecommunications  
ITU International Telecommunication Union  
LEO Low Earth Orbit  
MEO  Medium Earth Orbit  
MIMO  Multiple -Input and Multiple -Output  
mMTC  Massive Machine Type Communication  
NFV Network Functions Virtualization  
NHS  National Health Service  
NR 5G Ne w Radio  
NTN Non-Terrestrial Network  
ORAN  Open Radio Access Network  
OSS  Operation Support System  
PMN  Private Mobile Network  
RAN  Radio Access Network  
RedCap  Reduced Capability , also known as NR -Light  
RF Radio Frequency  
RIC RAN Intelligent Controller  
SA Standalone  (5G architecture)  
SDN  Software Defined Network  
SMS  Short Message Service  
SWOT  Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats  
TCO  Total Cost of Ownership  
TN Terrestrial Network  
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle  
UKRI  UK Research and Innovation  
uRLLC  Ultra -Reliable Low Latency Communications  
VR Virtual Reality  
XR Extended Reality  
 