Sweden’s national  
life sciences strategy2        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy
Prodution:  Ministry of Enterprise and Innovation
Cover photo: Ole Berg-Rusten NTB Scanpix/TT Nyhetsbyrå
Inside cover:  AstraZeneca
Article no:  N2020.03
Print:  ElandersSweden’s national life sciences strategy       3Foreword
Sweden is a knowledge nation that has long invested in equitable health 
care, research and innovation. This has benefited our economic  
prosperity, advanced our health care system and improved the health 
of our population. 
Sweden aims to be a leading life sciences nation. To tackle the challenges 
facing Sweden’s welfare, there must be greater focus on preventing ill 
health and disease. We need to rapidly introduce new working practices, 
technologies and treatments to improve the effectiveness and quality  
of health and social care. We can achieve this through world-leading  
research and innovation, favourable conditions for industry and an  
ecosystem of collaboration that attracts investment. 
Sweden has the necessary prerequisites: world-class research and  
research infrastructure, a health care system of high international  
standard, competitive industry and world-leading innovation.  
The Government is firmly committed to continuing to develop these 
areas of strength. We want Sweden to lead the international transition to 
precision medicine; it is under way and the life sciences sector plays  
a major role in it. Ultimately, it is a matter of improving health for 
women and men, girls and boys, improving patient empowerment and 
self-management of care and treatment, and empowering care recipients 
and increasing their confidence.
Today’s health care is yesterday’s research, and today’s research is  
tomorrow’s standard health care treatments. The pace of change is  
accelerating; major medical breakthroughs have taken place in recent 
years. Several types of cancer that we were previously powerless in  
the face of can now be cured or treated. Advances in assistive  
technologies offer completely new opportunities to improve the  
quality and effectiveness of care services. This can make daily life  
easier for both care recipients and staff. Similarly, the application of  4        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy
Ibrahim Baylan
Minister for Enterprise and Innovation
Matilda Ernkrans
Minister for Higher Education and Research
Lena Hallengren
Minister for Health and Social Affairsartificial intelligence creates new opportunities for using data and 
digital solutions in intelligent decision support systems and diagnostics. 
The changes taking place also call for skills development and create 
the need for new health professions, such as those that combine  
technological and medical expertise. Attracting top talent will be vital 
to ensure success. 
Sweden’s strength is collaboration between industry, academia and  
the public sector; through collaboration we can build a stronger  
society. Together with the entire life sciences sector, we will lay the 
foundation for continued progress – to improve the health of the  
population, develop our health care system and strengthen Sweden’s  
economic prosperity. Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       5Contents
Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       6
The role of life sciences in addressing health challenges and strengthening 
competitiveness          6
Priority areas        11 
1. Structures for collaboration        12
 1.1 Strengthened national coordination in life sciences    13
 1.2 Partnerships for regional and national mobilisation    13
 1.3 Nordic region – a world-leading life sciences hub   13
2. Unlocking the potential of health data for use in research and innovation   14
 2.1 Effective and secure sharing of patient data     17
 2.2 Increased use of health data in research and innovation   17
 2.3 Effective, secure and ethical use of register data    17
 2.4 Better use of biobanks      17
 2.5 Follow-up using real-world data     17
3. Responsible, secure and ethical policy development     18
 3.1 Efficient process for implementing new therapies    21
 3.2 Accelerated, secure and ethical policy development    21
 3.3 Implementing new medical device regulations    21
 3.4 Greater focus on preventive interventions and self-management    21
4. Integration of research and innovation into care delivery    22
 4.1 Incentives and good opportunities to combine clinical practice and research 25
 4.2 More industry-initiated clinical studies in Swedish health care   25
 4.3 High-quality clinical studies      25
 4.4 Pioneering the introduction of precision medicine in care services  25
5. Assistive technologies for increased independence, participation and health   26
 5.1 Harnessing the potential of assistive technologies    29
 5.2 Development and collaboration for implementation     29
6. Research and infrastructure       30
 6.1 Strengthened cross-sectoral life sciences research    33
 6.2 Excellent life sciences research infrastructure    33
 6.3 Increased and broader use of research infrastructure    33
 6.4 Strengthened infrastructures for data-driven research and innovation  33
 6.5 Increased Swedish participation in EU programmes    33
7. Skills supply, talent attraction and lifelong learning   34
 7.1 Good opportunities for lifelong learning     35
 7.2 Effective collaboration to ensure skills supply     35
 7.3 Offering competitive conditions to recruit internationally    35
8. International attractiveness and competitiveness     36
 8.1 Better business environment for research and development   37
 8.2 Increased export and investment promotion      37
 8.3 World-class business incubators      37
 8.4 Continuous monitoring, analysis and follow-up    376        Sweden’s national life sciences strategySweden aims to be a  
leading life sciences  
nation. Life sciences 
contribute to improving 
health and quality of life of 
the population, ensuring 
economic prosperity,  
advancing the country 
as a leading knowledge 
nation and achieving the 
2030 Agenda for Sustain-  
able Development.
This national strategy aims to  
strengthen the long-term com-  
petitiveness of Sweden as a life  
sciences nation. The Govern-  
ment’s life sciences strategy is  
intended for stakeholders with 
a mandate and ability to change 
conditions for life sciences in 
Sweden. Sector stakeholders pri -
marily include universities and 
higher education institutions,  
government agencies, authorities 
responsible for health and social 
care services, companies operat-  
ing in the life sciences area and 
public and private financiers of 
research and innovation. Patients, 
care recipients, and health and soc-  
ial care staff are key in this context, 
and their experience and expertise Sweden’s national life sciences strategy
must be harnessed in the change 
process – but without burdening 
them or similar groups with  
responsibility for development at 
national level. 
To strengthen the life sciences  
sector in Sweden, the Govern-  
ment has established a life sci-  
ences coordination function1 –  
the Life Sciences Office – to serve 
as a link between life sciences sector 
stakeholders and the Government’s 
work. The Office aims to promote  
knowledge development, inno -
vation and quality – in health 
and social care and at universi -
ties and higher education institu -
tions – and improve conditions 
for the establishment and opera -
tion of life sciences companies in 
Sweden. The aim of the strategy is 
to support the initiatives and  engagement to strengthen life  
sciences already present in society. 
The strategy builds on the policy  
direction previously adopted by 
the Government. In the strategy, 
the Government outlines objec -
tives in priority areas in which 
change is considered particu-  
larly important. The strategy and 
its objectives are based on the 
current financial framework. 
The role of life sciences in 
addressing health challenges 
and strengthening competi-  
tiveness
The pace of innovation is high in 
the life sciences sector. Data-driven 
innovative solutions and scientific 
advances will have a fundamental 
impact on developments in pre-  
vention, diagnostics, treatment,  
monitoring, habilitation and  
What is the life sciences sector?
The life sciences sector includes companies, higher education  
institutions, and public stakeholders at municipal, regional and 
state level whose activities contribute to promoting human 
health. The sector comprises research, higher education  
and innovation, the development of pharmaceuticals, medical 
devices and treatments, as well as prevention, implementation 
and monitoring.
 1 N2018/00814/IFK Establishing a life sciences coordination function at the Government Offices (in Swedish).Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       7
Sweden’s trade in pharmaceuticals  
and medical technology
Sweden’s foreign trade in pharmaceuticals 
and medical technology in SEK billions. In 
2018, exports of pharmaceuticals accounted 
for 5.7 per cent, and medical technology  
1 per cent, of Sweden’s total exports. Strong life sciences clusters in Sweden
Region Skåne, which includes Malmö-Lund, is part 
of Medicon Valley, the bi-national cluster of the 
Öresund region of Skåne-Copenhagen.Stockholm  
Uppsala
Malmö-LundLinköpingUmeå Net exportsSweden’s life sciences industry 
Source: Growth in Sweden’s life science industry 2014–16 , Swedish 
Agency for Growth Policy Analysis, 2018More than 42 000 employees  
in almost 3 000 companies
-10-5051015202530354045
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Nettoexport, Life Science Läkemedel Medicinteknik Net export, Life sciences Pharmaceuticals Medical technology-10-5051015202530354045
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Nettoexport, Life Science Läkemedel Medicinteknik
0102030405060708090
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Sveriges handel med läkemed och 
medicinteknik
Läkemedel, import Medicinteknik, Import
Läkemedel, Export Medicinteknik, ExportMedical technology, imports  
Medical technology, exportsPharmaceuticals, imports  
Pharmaceuticals, exports0102030405060708090
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Sveriges handel med läkemed och 
medicinteknik
Läkemedel, import Medicinteknik, Import
Läkemedel, Export Medicinteknik, ExportGothenburg
8        Sweden’s national life sciences strategyrehabilitation. Sweden’s capacity to 
harness these new opportunities 
will have consequences for costs to 
society, health outcomes and com -
petitiveness. Making such advances 
available should be facilitated. At 
the same time, all measures  
in the area must be implemented 
ethically, ensuring information  
security and privacy protection, as 
well as data protection and secrecy. 
Sweden is facing major health chal -
lenges at regional, national and 
global level. Health inequalities 
across socio-economic groups are 
increasing, the incidence of over -
weight, obesity and high blood 
pressure is rising and conditions 
indicative of mental ill health are 
becoming increasingly common. 
Disability and gender also have a 
bearing on health. The effects of 
socio-economic factors, disability 
and gender are also mutually  
reinforcing. Demographics are 
changing and the proportion of 
older people is increasing. This re -
sults in a greater need for health 
and social care interventions.  
Modern health care is further chal -
lenged by growing antimicrobial 
resistance and global pandemics.
 
To address these health challenges 
in the long term, Sweden needs to continue to invest in research and 
innovation, based in part on the 
principle of universal design. Tech -
nological and scientific advances 
must be promoted and applied. 
OECD data2 shows that relevant 
countries in 2017 invested on aver -
age only 2.8 per cent of their total 
health care expenditure in prevent-  
ing illness and disease (3.3 per cent 
in Sweden). Sweden – and the  
rest of the world – must change 
approach and invest more in health 
promotion and prevention of both 
lifestyle and other diseases.  
Greater knowledge is needed about 
how ill health can be prevented, at 
both individual and system level, 
to identify the most effective  
measures. Shifting to early diag -
nostics for children and adults also 
increases the chances of preventing 
or mitigating disease.
Health care is currently being 
transformed through increased  
opportunities for personalised 
care – or ‘precision medicine’. 
This transformation is challeng-  
ing existing working practices, 
priorities and structures, and  
creating new needs. Sweden must 
now ensure that all parts of the 
health care system have the  
prerequisites to enable this system 
transformation to continue. This must take place in close  
collaboration with industry, rele -
vant government agencies, 
universities and higher educa -
tion institutions. It is vital for the 
health and quality of life of the 
population that conditions are  
favourable for implementing new 
technologies in the health care 
system. Whole-genome sequenc-  
ing diagnostics is already being 
used today to identify the optimal 
treatment of certain cancers,  
reducing the significance of the 
location of the tumour in the 
body. Instead, the focus is on the 
type of cancer cells causing the 
disease. Other patient groups that 
particularly benefit from genetic  
diagnostics include those with 
rare hereditary diseases. The cause 
of around 250 such diseases are 
identified every year, and each 
new diagnosis may represent the 
launch point for developing targeted, 
potentially curing, therapies. 
Parallel with developments 
towards precision medicine, a 
structural change is under way in 
the Swedish health care system. It 
is aimed at developing a modern, 
equitable, accessible and effective 
health care service focusing on 
primary care, and ensuring that 
care interventions in highly spe-  
cialised care are allocated at the  
optimal level (‘level structuring’), 
both regionally and nationally.3,4 
With the support of the Swedish 
Association of Local Authorities 
and Regions, the regions are also 
establishing a common health care 
knowledge management system. 
Long-term development efforts to 
improve health include social, eco -
nomic and ecological sustainability.  
The incentive for a rapid climate-  
smart transition is strong, because 
this transition is a prerequisite for 
our health and wellbeing in the long 
term. The 2030 Agenda must  
therefore serve as a guide. What is precision medicine?
Precision medicine refers to diagnostic methods and therapies 
for personalised screening, prevention and treatment of  
disease, applied at individual level or to specific segments of the 
population. The new opportunities offered by precision medicine 
are based on recent advances in e.g. molecular biosciences  
(the ‘omic’ technologies) and bioinformatics, and the emergence 
of new high-resolution imaging technologies.
2OECD Health Statistics 2019 and own calculations.
3ToR 2017:24 Coordinated development of a modern, equitable, accessible and effective health care service,  
focusing on primary care (in Swedish).
 
4S2017/00506/FS Assignment to develop a procedure for level structuring of highly specialised care (in Swedish).Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       9Sweden is a successful research 
and innovation nation. The life 
sciences industry is one of our 
basic industries, but international 
competition is intensifying.  
Several comparable countries have 
made substantial investments in 
life sciences. 
To harness the potential in the 
sector, a strategic and integrated 
approach, with clear objectives, 
is required. Broad collaboration, 
with clarity regarding responsibili -
ties, is needed to reach consensus 
on which measures will be  
necessary from each stakeholder. 
As a long-term framework,  concrete initiatives will be regu -
larly linked to this strategy. The 
strategy is based on input from  
sector stakeholders, such as higher 
education institutions,  
government agencies, interest  
organisations and companies,  
including the life sciences partner-  
ship group. The Government has 
identified eight priority areas in 
which change is considered  
particularly important:
1. Structures for collaboration 
2. Unlocking the potential of 
health data for use in research 
and innovation
3. Responsible, secure and  
ethical policy development 4. Integration of research and 
innovation into care delivery
5. Assistive technologies for  
increased independence,  
participation and health 
6. Research and infrastructure 
7. Skills supply, talent attraction, 
and lifelong learning
8. International attractiveness 
and competitiveness 
Illustration: AstraZeneca10        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy
Photo: Johan Strindberg Bildhuset/TT NyhetsbyråSweden’s national life sciences strategy       11Eight priority areas  
and 30 objectives
1. Structures for collaboration  
5. Assistive technologies for increased independence,   
 participation and health
8. International attractiveness and competitiveness7. Skills supply, talent attraction and lifelong learning6. Research and infrastructure4. Integration of research and innovation  
 into care delivery3. Responsible, secure and ethical policy development 2. Unlocking the potential of health data for use in  
 research and innovation12        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy1. Structures for collaboration 
Broad collaboration is essential 
to enable Sweden to be a globally 
competitive life sciences nation. 
The transition to precision  
medicine in health and social care 
will require engagement from all  
stakeholders in the sector. System 
innovation is key to harnessing 
new digital opportunities and 
data use that will enable the  
delivery of effective, accessible, 
personalised and preventive 
health and social care services. 
Stakeholders in the life sciences 
sector have different assignments, 
clients and priorities, and work 
towards similar but somewhat 
different goals. This gives the  
sector an inherent complexity, 
making collaboration and coor -
dination more difficult. Stake -
holders in the sector demonstrate 
strong engagement and a clear 
understanding that collaboration  
is key to achieving improve -
ments. Collaboration is also  
important for achieving greater 
staff mobility and skills develop -
ment throughout the sector. 
Collaboration is particularly  
important in relation to the  
regional responsibility for planning 
and delivering health care, and 
coordinating and facilitating  
regional development. The  regional areas of strength and  
specialisation need to be encour-  
aged to act as engines to boost 
Sweden’s life sciences internation-  
ally. Regional life sciences strate-  
gies, produced by the regions 
themselves, are important for  
developing Sweden’s strengths, 
while also needing to be synchro -
nised with initiatives conducted 
under the national strategy.
Several government agencies have 
assignments and responsibilities 
in the life sciences area, such  
as regulation, supervision and  
issuing permits. Their areas of  
responsibility are related from  
various perspectives, which is why 
collaboration between them is 
vital. They are key actors in  
developing the sector and 
Sweden’s attractiveness as an  
international partner. A number  
of government agencies come  
together in the Council for 
Knowledge Management.5 The 
Council’s work helps ensure that 
the right knowledge reaches  
the responsible authorities and 
professions in health care and  
social services. Linked to the 
Council is an inter-agency group, 
comprising representatives from 
regions and municipalities, which 
is tasked with informing the Council of areas in which the  
responsible authorities need 
knowledge. 
The Government has launched 
four innovation partnership  
programmes for the electoral  
period 2019–2022, one of which 
is in health and life sciences.  
A partnership group, including  
representatives from health care, 
universities and higher education 
institutions, industry, patients and 
professions, advises the life sci-  
ences innovation partnership  
programme and the Life Sciences 
Office. Through cross-sectoral 
mobilisation, this innovation  
partnership programme aims to 
tackle major health challenges  
and strengthen Sweden’s global 
innovation capacity and competi -
tiveness. The National Innovation 
Council, led by Sweden’s Prime 
Minister, works closely with  
these innovation partnership  
programmes. 
In addition to the innovation  
partnership programmes, the  
Government has undertaken a 
range of other initiatives to  
strengthen national collaboration. 
The Swedish Governmental Agency 
for Innovation Systems (Vinnova) 
funds strategic innovation pro -
grammes that facilitate national 
mobilisation and make common 
priorities and initiatives between  5Ordinance on central government knowledge management in health care and social services  
(2015:155, in Swedish).  
 
 Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       13sector stakeholders possible.
In life sciences, the strategic inno-  
vation programmes Swelife and 
Medtech4Health play an impor -
tant role. Moreover, the Swedish 
Research Council funds Clinical 
Studies Sweden, a network of  
regional nodes aimed at strengthen-  
ing the conditions for conducting 
clinical studies in Sweden. 
Nordic cooperation on policy  
issues would improve the possibility 
of using combined population and 
patient bases. Continued develop -
ment of Nordic cooperation –  
including on clinical research and 
clinical studies, the use of bio -
banks and health data, patient 
mobility and the application of  
artificial intelligence – would  
improve the entire region’s  
competitiveness in relation to the 
global life sciences sector. 1.1 Strengthened national coordination in life sciences
The Government wants to strengthen the Swedish life sciences sector 
through clear national leadership. The Life Sciences Office contributes 
to more effective collaboration, cooperation and coordination.  
Collaboration between government agencies is key to ensuring that 
a uniform national approach is achieved for the development of life 
sciences in Sweden. 
1.2 Partnerships for regional and national mobilisation
The Government considers it essential that developments in life sciences 
are conducted jointly and in a coordinated manner – at national,  
regional and local level – in close collaboration with industry, universities 
and higher education institutions. Partnership with the regions can 
demonstrate a shared ambition for life sciences and create conditions 
for realising it. 
1.3 Nordic region – a world-leading life sciences hub
In the Government’s assessment, broader Nordic cooperation can 
contribute to increased competitiveness. Joint policy development 
efforts can contribute to harmonised implementation of new digital 
solutions and precision medicine.  Objectives14        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy2. Unlocking the potential of health data for use in  
 research and innovation
System solutions to unlock the 
potential of health data are  
essential to enable Sweden to 
spearhead developments in life 
sciences. Huge volumes of data – 
‘real-world data’ – are generated 
daily in self-management, health 
and social care. A prerequisite for 
using this data to develop future 
care and preventive interventions 
is compliance with legislative  
requirements for protection of 
privacy, such as protection of  
natural persons with respect to 
processing personal data, public 
access to information and secrecy, 
information security and security 
protection.6  
Technological developments mean 
that the volume of health data is 
more extensive and potentially  
What is Real-World Data?
There is no single, generally accepted definition of ‘real-world 
data’. In this context, it refers to information on the treatment 
and health of individuals, found in registers and medical records, 
and lifestyle information collected through mobile applications 
and wearable technology. Such data is not collected primarily 
for scientific use, but it can be used for research in accordance 
with existing regulatory frameworks. Findings from observational 
studies based on data from everyday clinical practice are called 
‘real-world evidence’.more accessible than previously.  
The transition to mainly digital  
management of personal data in 
both social services and health care 
has taken place at the same time  
as these areas have undergone  
changes in their organisation and 
responsibilities. Consequently, 
the need for information sharing 
between care providers or practi -
tioners to provide good and safe 
health and social care, while  
maintaining privacy and security,  
has increased in recent years. In 
light of this, the Government 
considers that a review of certain 
issues in the area is required and 
has therefore appointed an  
inquiry.7 Enabling data to be used 
in research, innovation and  
development requires interoper-  
ability. This includes, for example, the technology to share data 
(technical interoperability), the use 
of the same terms/context  
references by those who input 
data to the system (semantic  
interoperability) and a legal basis 
for processing data generated in 
another activity (legal interoper-  
ability). Secure identification and 
authorisation solutions are other 
requirements. There are a number 
of areas in which existing legisla -
tion – regulating how data may be 
used for research and innovation 
– is interpreted differently by dif -
ferent stakeholders. This includes 
personal data processing carried 
out in health care for sample size 
calculation (pre-screening of po -
tential patients ahead of clinical 
trials) and the regulation of  
research that includes acutely 
unconscious patients. The fact 
that legislation is interpreted  
differently may be due to varying 
levels of knowledge among  
stakeholders, but it is also due to 
actual ambiguities and obstacles 
that may need to be addressed or 
clarified.
At the same time, the changing use 
of new technology and new inno -
vations based on data sharing and 
interconnected information systems 
makes threats more difficult to  
detect, risks more difficult to assess 
and dependencies more difficult  
to examine. This poses particular 6National strategy for society’s information and cyber security (Govt Communication 2016/17:213).
7ToR 2019:37 Review of certain issues relating to personal data processing in social services and health care services 
(in Swedish).  Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       15
Ilustration: Science Photo Library/TT Nyhetsbyrå16        Sweden’s national life sciences strategychallenges for information  
management in vital public ser-  
vices such as health and social 
care. Medical records and registers 
contain particularly sensitive per -
sonal data, which raises questions 
about public access to information 
and secrecy, data protection and  
privacy protection. The sharing of  
patient data and access to various 
types of registers bring many of 
these issues into the limelight. 
The same applies to assistive tech -
nologies in health and social care, 
and research and infrastructure. 
Data generated in health and social 
care is stored in a variety of sys -
tems, such as medication modules, 
imaging diagnostic systems, labo -
ratory reports and medical records 
systems. An essential prerequisite 
for making data accessible is that 
the regions ensure that their  
investments in future medical  
information systems take interna -
tional standards and open plat -
forms into account, and that these 
systems are developed to conform 
with strict standards of informa -
tion security. Making data  
accessible also involves enabling 
data analysis and eliminating the 
need to transfer data from various 
sources for use in research and 
innovation (e.g. federating data).  
The Vision for eHealth,8 adopted by 
the Government and the Swedish 
Association of Local Authorities 
and Regions, states that, by 2025, 
Sweden will be the best in the 
world at using the opportunities 
offered by digital transformation 
and eHealth. This joint commitment involves, for example, clarifying 
and, when necessary, changing  
regulatory frameworks, devel-  
oping a more consistent use of 
terms, and standardisation. The 
Swedish eHealth Agency has been 
tasked with coordinating this 
work.9
  
Proper access to current data is 
needed to monitor and improve 
the quality of health and social 
care services. It is also an impor -
tant tool in making health and  
social care services more effective, 
gender-equal and equitable across 
the country. Certain government 
agencies, such as the Dental  
and Pharmaceutical Benefits 
Agency, rely on data to carry out 
their tasks. This requires access to  
quality-assured data on care  
interventions and outcomes at dif -
ferent levels and for different  
stakeholders. To broaden data  
accessibility, especially in relation 
to the shift to delivering more 
quality and local health care, the 
National Board of Health and 
Welfare has been tasked with de -
veloping the national follow-up 
plan for primary care.10 
Certain health data is transferred 
to different types of national or 
regional registers. The diagnosis-  
specific ‘quality registers’ have 
developed over a long period of 
time with the aim of improving 
and ensuring health care quality. 
In recent years, central government 
and the regions have made joint 
investments in these registers. An 
agreement between the  parties11 states that the registers 
should be used as a source of 
knowledge for clinical research, 
including cooperation with the 
life sciences sector. Other regis -
ters include the national health 
data registers. These are individual-  
based registers, provided by the 
National Board of Health and 
Welfare, and cover inpatient and 
some outpatient care interven -
tions, dental care, causes of death 
and prescribed drugs. There are 
also biobanks, which are collec -
tions of samples prepared from 
human biological material such as 
blood samples. Within the 
framework of Biobank Sweden, 
regions and higher education 
institutions are cooperating to 
build an integrated health care 
infrastructure for biobanks. The 
Biobank Inquiry12 has submitted 
proposals to adapt this legislation 
to facilitate developments and  
improve conditions for using 
samples and information in 
Swedish biobanks to meet the 
needs of patients, health care and 
research. The Inquiry has also 
proposed establishing a national 
sample register (the national  
biobank register).13
  
The Swedish Research Council 
maintains the Register Utiliser 
Tool (RUT), a metadata tool that 
can be used to quickly gain a  
quality-assured overview of the 
information that is available and 
can be linked from different regis -
ters. RUT includes national public 
authority registers, national qual-  
ity registers, research-generated 
data and biobanks. New registers 
are being added to optimise the 
use of data in research, enabling 
RUT to function as a national 
portal for sources of register 
data. Health data is also stored 
privately by individuals – in health 
apps to monitor personal progress 
and in medical device apps that 8https://ehalsa2025.se/in-english/.
9S2019/01521/FS Assignment to make available and manage common national specifications (in Swedish).
10S2019/03056/FS Assignment to develop the national follow-up plan for primary care (in Swedish). 
11S2019/02385/FS Authorisation to sign an agreement on support to national quality registers in 2019 (in Swedish).
12The Biobank Inquiry was tasked with reviewing legislation regulating the management of human biological material 
in biobanks.
 
13SOU 2018:4 Biobanks of the future , the Inquiry’s final report (in Swedish).Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       17assist patients with self-manage -
ment of chronic diseases.  
Surveys show that the Swedish  
population is generally positive 
about the use of their anonymised 
data in health care research and 
development,14 but people want to 
be informed if they are added to a 
register and want to be able to opt 
out.15 A group of chronic  
disease patients, known as ‘lead 
user patients’ ( spetspatienter ), are  
already contributing knowledge 
and data generated as they partici -
pate in self-management. Self-  
reported data has great potential 
for use in care, and in research and 
innovation. However, to enable 
such data to be shared, solutions 
must be developed so sharing can 
take place while ensuring infor -
mation security and privacy  
protection.
 
Efforts around the globe to  
promote access to and unlock the 
potential of health data for use in 
research and innovation are  
currently attracting global tech 
companies. The driving force is 
potential synergies gained by  
partnering with life sciences  
stakeholders on the use of health 
data. However, the interest of 
companies in accessing and using 
public data generated in Sweden 
must be balanced against the  
protection of the individual’s basic 
rights and freedoms, such as  
protection of privacy, including 
protection of natural persons with 
respect to processing personal 
data, and must observe the impor -
tance of maintaining a high level 
of public trust in the open society. Objectives
2.1 Effective and secure sharing of patient data 
The Government considers that regions and municipalities need better 
conditions for sharing patient data between different care providers. 
The basic premise is to strengthen these developments in data sharing 
while continuing to deliver safe and quality health care, and while  
also respecting privacy and ensuring information security requirements 
are met. 
2.2 Increased use of health data in research and innovation
The Government would like the use of health data in research and  
innovation to increase, while maintaining privacy protection,  
to contribute to improved patient care and industry development.  
Ambiguities and obstacles to processing health data, and associated 
ethical considerations, need to be addressed. This is essential to 
strengthen Sweden’s prominent position in digital transformation and 
data use. At the same time, sectoral knowledge of applicable legislation 
needs to be improved. 
2.3 Effective, secure and ethical use of register data 
The Government considers that the life sciences sector’s use of register 
data for research and innovation should increase. It is essential that  
infrastructure, legislation, guidelines and other forms of support  
contribute to the effective, secure and ethical use of quality registers 
and health data registers, for example, and that a review is conducted of 
patient opportunities to self-report their data. 
2.4 Better use of biobanks 
The Inquiry on the regulation of biobanks has submitted a proposal for 
a new biobank act. The Government intends to consider the proposal 
during this electoral period. Developing the use of biobank samples 
should be made possible, provided that sample donor privacy is  
respected. Secure and stable structures are also needed for storing, 
searching and retrieving information and samples from biobanks. 
2.5 Follow-up using real-world data
In the Government’s assessment, the possibility to follow up and use 
real-world data needs to improve. This involves good conditions for 
collecting and analysing such data, including self-reported data. 
14Research!Sweden’s 2019 opinion poll.
15For safety’s sake , Swedish Agency for Health and Care Services Analysis, report 2017:10 (in Swedish).18        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy3. Responsible, secure and ethical policy development 
As artificial intelligence (AI) and 
precision medicine are introduced 
in health care, the need for  
policy development increases.  
This includes adapting regulatory 
frameworks, approaches and  
working practices to be able to be -
nefit from technological develop -
ments and new innovations.  
Implementation must also take 
into account continued rapid tech -
nological developments, including 
the constant need for updating, 
and robustness and redundancy re-  
quirements. The Government has  
appointed the Committee for 
Technological Innovation and 
Ethics (KOMET)16 for coordi-  
nated and accelerated policy devel-  
opment. KOMET will continuously 
deliver input on precision medicine 
and other areas. Policy develop -
ment to enable increased focus on 
both prevention and implementa -
tion requires active collaboration 
between government agencies.
Sweden’s ambition is to be a  
leader in harnessing the opportu -
nities that AI can offer, with the 
aim of strengthening Sweden’s welfare and competitiveness.17 This 
requires long-term measures for 
knowledge-building, skills sup-  
ply, access to large volumes of 
high-quality data and computa-  
tional capabilities, along with  
effective national and interna -
tional frameworks to guarantee 
transparency, trust, security,  
privacy protection and an ethical 
approach. This ambition is well  
in line with the Government’s  
Digital Strategy, with the objec-  
tive that Sweden will be the world 
leader in harnessing the opportu -
nities offered by digital transfor -
mation.18 However, the use of AI 
in health care in Sweden is still 
limited.19  National investments 
in cross-sectoral cooperation are 
being made by AI Innovation of 
Sweden.20 Alongside this, private 
financiers have made major  
investments in AI research, includ-  
ing a billion-kronor investment 
by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg 
Foundation.
Certain new gene and cell  
therapies, known as advanced  
therapy medicinal products (ATMPs), offer potential cures 
and may be used for patient 
groups currently on lifelong  
treatment or without treatment 
options. These new medicinal 
products pose major challenges 
for financing and pricing systems, 
as they have a high treatment cost 
per patient and treatment. For  
traditional medicinal products, 
this cost may be spread over a 
long treatment period and, if the 
treatment is ineffective, it can be 
discontinued. Regarding ATMPs, 
there is considerable uncertainty  
at present about the long-term  
effects. Because such treatments 
are given on one occasion, this 
uncertainty needs to be con-  
sidered in connection with pricing 
and decisions concerning their 
use. However, these new therapies 
could result in a lower overall cost 
to society, but new working prac -
tices would be required. ATMPs 
also challenge current working 
practices in terms of evaluation, 
regulatory approval and intro -
duction. The clinical studies on 
which regulatory approval is often 
based include only a small num -
ber of patients, which is why in -
troduction into health care delivery is 
based on limited data volumes.  
This places greater demands on 
follow-up, i.e. constant access to 
relevant data (see also priority  
area 2), and regulatory framework  
development based on  16 ToR 2018:85 Coordinated and accelerated policy development linked to fourth industrial revolution technologies.
17N2018.14 National approach to artificial intelligence.
18N2017/03643/D For sustainable digital transformation in Sweden – a Digital Strategy .
 19Digital care services and artificial intelligence in health care,  National Board of Health  
and Welfare report, 2019 (in Swedish).
 
20https://www.ai.se/en.Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       19
Illustration: AstraZeneca20        Sweden’s national life sciences strategyknowledge-building through  
international collaboration in  
regulatory sciences, as conducted 
by the Swedish Medical Products 
Agency.
Research and development that is 
increasingly data-driven and largely 
based on sensitive personal data  
requires high security standards, 
both in terms of technology and 
privacy. The General Data  
Protection Regulation regulates 
the processing of personal data on 
a general level. Processing per-  
sonal data in this area encompasses 
both general and sector-specific 
data protection regulations.
Using sensitive personal data 
for research purposes requires 
an ethical review. The organisa -
tion for ethical reviews in Sweden 
was recently changed through 
the establishment of the Swedish 
Ethical Review Authority. More -
over, from 2020 an independent 
board will be responsible  
for investigations and decisions 
related to research misconduct in 
the form of fabrication, falsifica -
tion or plagiarism of data.  
Access to information from public 
registers for research purposes 
is regulated in the Public Access 
to Information and Secrecy Act 
(2009:400).
An ethical approach in clinical  
research, however, involves more 
elements than effective structures 
and legislation. It is essential that 
any clinical studies conducted are 
of high quality so that findings 
can be used and implemented. 
Anything else would be unethical treatment of patients who consent 
to give their time and data to 
these studies (see also priority  
area 4). In addition, equal opportu-  
nities should also exist to enable  
patients to take part in clinical 
studies, regardless of where they 
live in Sweden. 
To better harness patients’  
potential and expertise, flexibility  
is needed with respect to where 
and when health care interven -
tions are conducted. In the future, 
it should be possible for some of 
the interventions currently con-  
ducted in hospitals and health 
centres to take place to a greater 
extent at home. Perhaps this ap-
plies primarily, but not exclusively, 
to patients with chronic diseases 
who are well informed about their 
health condition. Enabling patients 
to take certain tests on their own 
at home, for example, can save  
resources while patients save time 
spent on travel. Providing more 
opportunities for patients to  
manage their own care can thus 
benefit both the health care  
system and the individual. This 
means that user needs must be 
considered in the development of 
services and products. Increased 
patient and user influence is there -
fore a key policy issue in the area 
of life sciences.
Collaboration between dental care 
and health care is important,  
as a large proportion of the popu -
lation regularly seeks dental care. 
Dental examinations can poten -
tially be used to detect diseases 
that are not directly related to oral 
health. Health screening in dental care could improve the prospects 
for early diagnosis and preventive 
interventions in primary care, for 
instance. 
New regulatory frameworks for 
medical devices21 and in vitro  
diagnostic medical devices22 will 
apply from May 2021 and May 
2022, respectively. Sweeping 
changes in these new regulations 
clarify the importance of new 
working practices and policy  
development. In several cases,  
the regulations require further 
evaluations of existing products as 
a result of stricter requirements. 
The adaptations required for this 
are expected to represent a major 
challenge for medical technology 
companies, particularly in view  
of the considerable shortage of 
notified bodies23  at present. If 
evaluation and certification of 
new medical devices take a long 
time because of the shortage of  
notified bodies, there is a risk that 
Swedish companies and researchers 
will choose to look abroad to  
develop medical device innovations. 
21Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices,  
amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing 
Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC.
22Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on in vitro diagnostic  
medical devices and repealing Directive 98/79/EC and Commission Decision 2010/227/EU.
 
23Notified bodies are independent organisations that assist and monitor manufacturers’ efforts to verify that  
products comply with EU regulations, https://www.swedac.se/services/notified-appointed-bodies/?lang=en.Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       21Objectives
3.1 Efficient process for implementing new therapies
The Government considers it necessary to optimise the time between 
the approval and implementation of new therapies. Greater knowledge 
is needed about how authorities responsible for health care can  
manage the costs and uncertainties associated with ATMPs, and what 
the need for new business and investment models will be. Moreover, 
better conditions are needed for conducting health technology  
assessments on medical devices in precision medicine. 
3.2 Accelerated, secure and ethical policy development 
The Government considers that the public sector’s ability to identify 
and propose changes to regulatory frameworks, applications and  
working practices needs to be developed. The need for accelerated,  
secure and ethical policy development through policy labs, for example, 
is particularly great in terms of regulatory aspects. Sweden should be 
the country of choice for introducing new diagnostics and therapies, 
based on its excellence in regulatory issues.
3.3 Implementing new medical device regulations
The Government considers that access to notified bodies in Sweden 
must correspond to sector needs. It is crucial to ensure that notified 
bodies are in place so that the new medical device regulations can  
be applied.
3.4 Greater focus on preventive interventions and self-  
management
The Government considers that Sweden should increase its focus 
on health and prevention, including both preventive interventions to 
prevent the development of ill health and fully developed diseases, and 
initiatives to prevent recurrences (primary and secondary prevention). 
Improving capacity for early diagnosis will create better conditions for 
early treatment, prevention and self-management. 22        Sweden’s national life sciences strategyNew knowledge – in the form of 
health-promotion methods,  
products and treatments – is best  
developed and evaluated where care 
recipients are found, using their  
expertise and cooperation in the  
development process. Research  
and innovation need to be core 
components of health care, dental 
care and social care services.  
Collaboration with industry and 
academia is essential. This will 
require practical conditions and 
clear incentives. It must be organi -
sationally and financially  
feasible for staff to take part, while 
their participation also needs to 
create added value for the partici -
pating patients, staff and services. 
The ongoing structural changes in 
the health care system, including  
increased focus on primary care 
and a greater degree of level 
structuring of highly specialised 
care, are changing the conditions 
for research and innovation in  
care delivery. 4. Integration of research and innovation into  
 care delivery
 
Sweden’s national cancer strategy 
and the structure of six collabo -
rating regional cancer centres can 
be seen as a model for coordinated 
clinical development and  
implementation of new knowl-  
edge. Furthermore, the regions’ 
health care knowledge manage -
ment system, which also includes dental care, ensures that research 
and innovation are natural parts of 
these services’ remit and that  
greater opportunities are provided 
for relevant implementation.   
Cooperation between central  
government and the regions  
on medical training, clinical  
research and the development of 
health care is regulated by the ALF 
agreement.24  When the agreement 
was renewed in 2015, a system was 
introduced to regularly evaluate  
the quality of health care and  
clinical research conducted at the 
university hospitals. According to 
the most recent ALF evaluation, 
Swedish clinical research is of  
high quality.25 Access to quality  
registers and biobanks provides  
What is the ALF agreement?
The ALF agreement provides almost SEK 2 billion per year in 
remuneration from central government to the regions for clinical 
research (SEK 1.89 billion in 2020).
Source: ALF, the agreement between Sweden’s central government and seven regions on 
medical training, clinical research and the development of health care 
24The agreement between Sweden’s central government and seven regions on medical training,  
clinical research and the development of health care.Photo: Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset
25Evaluation of the quality of clinical research in the regions covered by the ALF agreement,  
Swedish Research Council, 2018.Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       23-5%0%5%10%15%20%25%
2015 Förändring 2015 - 2030favourable conditions for conduct-  
ing clinical research in Sweden. 
Greater coordination, based on  
national strategies, would further 
improve the quality. The evaluation 
also points to the need for greater 
internationalisation of Sweden’s 
health care, for example through 
programmes for clinical practice 
and scientific work abroad.  
Cooperation with the regions also 
takes place within the framework 
of Clinical Studies Sweden, a  
collaboration between Sweden’s 
six health care regions funded and 
supported by the Swedish Research 
Council. The aim is to support and 
Health expenditure as a percentage of GDP in 2015 and projected changes for 
2015–2030. Source: OECD Health at a glance, 2019Health expenditure as a percentage of GDP in 2015  
and projected changes for 2015–2030develop conditions for clinical  
studies in Sweden through regional 
nodes. In the 2000s, the number 
of clinical trials of medicinal  
products dropped in Sweden; this 
has often been interpreted as a  
reduction in clinical research in 
general. But this is not the case in 
terms of the funding of clinical  
research or the number of applica -
tions for ethical review.26 Never-  
theless, sector stakeholders perceive 
that conditions for conducting  
clinical research have deteriorated 
in recent years, as time and resources 
are increasingly in short supply in 
the health care system. Major challenges – the need for 
access to digital health data,  
expertise and infrastructure – are 
expected at all levels of the health 
care system, as precision medi -
cine’s new, advanced diagnostics 
and treatment are developed and 
introduced. Neither highly spe-  
cialised care services nor medical  
device and product manufacturers 
can develop and make these  
treatments available on their own. 
Within the framework of  
Genomic Medicine Sweden,  
central government and the  
regions are collaborating to build 
up a national infrastructure for 
 Change 2015–2030Turkey
Latvia
Lithuania
Estonia
Poland
Mexico
Hungary
Luxembourg
Colombia
Slovakia
Czechia
Greece
Israel
Ireland
Portugal
Slovenia
South Korea
Italy
Chile
Spain
OECD36
Iceland
New Zealand
Belgium
UK
Finland
Austria
Netherlands
Denmark
Japan
Norway
Germany
Australia
Sweden
France
Canada
Switzerland
USA
 2015
26The number of applications increased from 2 077 in 2010 to 2 461 in 2018 (excluding applications to make  
changes), figures from the Swedish Research Council, based on annual reports of the ethical review boards.24        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy
Photo: Sahlgrenska University HospitalSweden’s national life sciences strategy       25Objectives
4.1 Incentives and good opportunities to combine clinical practice 
and research
The Government considers that good conditions for combining clinical 
practice and research throughout the health care system are essential. 
The combination of both clinical and research expertise is important 
for the continued development of Sweden’s health care system. It is 
also important to create equivalent conditions in social care services. 
4.2 More industry-initiated clinical studies in Swedish health care 
The Government wants more clinical studies, conducted in  
collaboration with industry, to be located in Sweden. For Sweden to  
be able to compete for future studies, infrastructure is needed that 
permits rapid application in clinical use and effective evaluation of  
diagnostics and treatment outcomes. Ensuring that the health  
care system has the resources and expertise needed to take part  
in industry collaboration is also important. 
4.3 High-quality clinical studies
The Government considers it important that clinical studies conducted 
in Sweden’s health care system are of high quality. High quality is  
imperative to ensure that research findings can contribute to innovation, 
and be implemented and of benefit to patients and in health care.
4.4 Pioneering the introduction of precision medicine  
in care services
The Government wants Sweden to pioneer the implementation of 
precision medicine in health care services. This will require sustainable, 
supportive structures for diagnostics, bioinformatics and intelligent 
digital decision-support systems for prevention and treatment, and 
remuneration systems that encourage innovation and implementation 
of new technologies. implementing precision medicine in 
Swedish health care services.  
The initiative originated in  
the Swedish Science for Life  
Laboratory (SciLifeLab) and is 
largely based on the infra-  
structure offered there. The goal is 
to make new whole-genome  
sequencing technologies available, 
cost-effectively and equitably, 
throughout the country and  
establish regional genomic  
medicine centres at the university 
hospitals. 26        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy5. Assistive technologies for increased independence,  
 participation and health
27Advances in eHealth and assistive technologies in the municipalities in 2019, National Board of Health and Welfare 
follow-up survey (in Swedish).   
 
28The state of play and advances in health, medical and dental care,  National Board of Health and Welfare status report 
(in Swedish).New digital services and health and 
assistive technology solutions have 
major potential to improve health 
and develop health care and social 
care services through prevention, 
habilitation and rehabilitation. 
The use of wearable technology 
and remote monitoring, for ex -
ample, creates new opportunities 
to support individuals and  
provide system-level monitoring. 
At the same time, perspectives 
such as privacy protection, infor -
mation security, robustness and 
redundancy must inform imple -
mentation. This will create  
conditions for more equitable 
health and increased quality and 
effectiveness in activities, while 
creating new business opportu -
nities. To achieve this at system 
level, more effective public-private 
partnerships are required that  
include clear user involvement.
Digital technologies can increase 
security, confidence, participation 
and independence for everyone. 
They can help improve quality of 
life, particularly for older people 
and people with disabilities, and 
include wearable technology or 
mobile applications that provide 
reminders or support. Most  municipalities are currently  
engaged in implementing assistive 
technology solutions in their  
activities, but progress is slow.27 
For example, there is a lack of 
knowledge about how assistive  
technologies can best be inte-  
grated into care services. This  
includes both how these products 
should be designed to ensure  
quality standards and usability,  
and new working practices. To  
increase this knowledge, public  
sector employees need to be in-  
volved in research work. Vinnova 
has co-financed several program -
mes aimed at more effectively  
identifying and harnessing existing  
knowledge and ideas within the 
public sector. 
Digital health care services can, 
for example, improve access to  
initial care contacts and the ability to 
provide continuous monitor-  
ing. Sweden’s launch of the 5G 
network is planned in 2020. By 
offering higher speeds and mini -
mal latency, while guaranteeing a 
stable connection, 5G will  
enable the introduction of new 
and more advanced monitoring and 
remote care services. The internet 
of things (IoT) enables equipment with built-in sensors and  
connectivity to be controlled and 
share data via the internet. This 
increasing number of IoT-based 
solutions further reinforces the 
need for information security.
Technological solutions are ex-  
pected to create new working 
practices that may increase the 
attractiveness of working in the 
welfare sector. This will also  
result in a broader labour market 
for technology and data profes -
sionals. But it will require ethical 
considerations and further exami -
nation of the legal framework for 
the use of digital technologies, and 
skills development initiatives for 
staff, especially in ethics. An  
important issue will be the extent 
to which assistive technologies 
can be used in health and social 
care for people with impaired  
decsion-making capacity.
Municipal health care services 
comprise a large part of the total 
health care system. In 2016,  
municipal expenditure was 
around SEK 127 billion, equiva -
lent to 26 per cent of total health 
care expenditure.28 As many  
municipalities are small and have 
limited resources, there is a  
call for collaboration between 
municipalities, clearer national 
coordination and governance,  
and national support.  Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       27450000 350000 250000 150000 50000 50000 150000 250000 350000 4500000-4 år10-14 år20-24 år30-34 år40-44 år50-54 år60-64 år70-74 år80-84 år90-94 år100+ år
män 2018
män, prognos 2070
kvinnor 2018
kvinnor, prognos 2070
Men WomenPopulation disaggregated by gender and age in 2018 and 2070 (projection)Age distribution of Sweden’s population
29 Swedes and the Internet 2019, Swedish Internet Foundation survey.The Government has therefore  
tasked the National Board  
of Health and Welfare with  
strengthening support to munici -
pally financed health care ser-  
vices. The assignment is based 
on the action plan presented in 
the National Board of Health and 
Welfare’s report, Municipally  
financed health care services – pilot 
study (in Swedish). Support in-  
cludes both knowledge necessary  
for developing care services at 
system level and for ensuring high 
quality staff-patient interaction.
In the future, life expectancy 
is expected to increase in most 
countries around the world.  
Statistics Sweden’s 2016 popula -
tion projection estimates that life 
expectancy in Sweden in 2060 will be almost 90 years for women 
and almost 87 years for men. This 
means that the proportion of 
older people in the population is 
increasing. In 2017, almost every 
fifth person was over the age of 
65. As the population ages, the 
risk of disease and multimorbidity 
increases. At present, people aged 
80 and older account for around  
5 per cent of the population, but 
by 2050 they are expected to  
account for around 9 per cent. 
To address the growing need for 
health and social care services, 
both systems need to be developed.
Older people in Sweden today are 
active well into their older years 
and, by international compar-  
isons, have a high level of tech -
nology uptake.29 This means that they have different expectations 
of health and social care com-  
pared with previous generations.  
An increasing proportion of older 
people with extensive and com -
plex health and social care needs 
currently receive this care at 
home. The digital transformation 
in social care must be supported 
by technological solutions com -
mon to all public administration 
to provide the best conditions for 
good operational support for both 
professionals and care recipients.
There are considerable knowledge 
gaps in the scientific evidence for 
many areas within the mandate  
of social services. The Swedish 
Research Council for Health, 
Working Life and Welfare (Forte) 
is responsible for the national  
programme on applied welfare  
research, which works to improve 
knowledge in social services.  Men 2018
Men 2070 (projection)
Women 2018
Women 2070 (projection)yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
yrs
450 000    350 000    250 000     150 000     50 000      50 000     150 000    250 000    350 000    450 00028        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy30Priorities for research on social services – perspectives from users, policy-makers and practitioners,   
SBU and Forte, 2019. 
The programme includes the PhD 
studies initiative, which aims  
to contribute to long-term  
knowledge-building in social  
services. In partnership with the 
Swedish Agency for Health Tech -
nology Assessment and Assess -
ment of Social Services (SBU), 
Forte has also conducted a sur -
vey of the research needs in social 
services.30  The areas assessed as most important for increased re -
search include how social services 
can work on implementing, disin -
vesting and introducing evidence-  
based knowledge, what methods 
can be used to follow up on  
interventions, and how the parti -
cipation of service users and their 
relatives can be developed within 
social services to improve the  
situation for care recipients/clients Photo: Viktor Bjurlid /Totalskidskolan
and the working practices of  
social servicesSweden’s national life sciences strategy       29Objectives
5.1 Harnessing the potential of assistive technologies 
To improve quality and provide more effective working practices, 
the Government sees the need to accelerate digital transformation 
through better use of assistive technologies in care services and to 
promote preventive interventions, while also ensuring that privacy 
protection, information security, robustness and redundancy inform 
implementation. Assistive technology solutions need to be integrated 
into activities and, in some cases, linked to existing operational  
systems in care services to achieve the greatest possible benefit.  
5.2 Development and collaboration for implementation 
The Government sees the need for increased collaboration between 
regulatory authorities and industry. This collaboration aims to support 
the rapidly growing sector for health and assistive technology  
companies in Sweden by providing knowledge about regulatory  
frameworks that enable these companies to develop products and 
services in accordance with applicable legislation in the area.  
This will improve the opportunities for these companies to grow  
on a global market, with local ties in Sweden. 
Photo: Justem Johnsson, Scandinav/ TT Nyhetsbyrån30        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy6. Research and infrastructure
Research of the highest inter-  
national standards is important  
for Sweden’s development and 
prosperity in a globalised world. 
In contrast to those of central  
government, industry investments 
in research in Sweden have fallen 
for a number of years, particularly 
as a result of major global  
corporations choosing to  
locate a larger share of their  
research to international research 
environments outside of Sweden. 
This underscores the need for  
excellent and world-class research 
at Swedish universities and higher 
education institutions, and strong 
incentives for collaborating with 
the surrounding community. 
International partnerships and 
contexts are needed to enable 
Swedish research to advance and 
for research quality to improve. 
They are also needed to tackle 
transnational social challenges and 
address the 2030 Agenda. Among 
international financiers, the EU is 
the most significant for Swedish 
researchers. Up to March 2019, 
Sweden had been granted EUR 
1.4 billion in funding from the  
research and innovation frame-  
work programme Horizon 2020 
in eighth place after countries that 
all have larger populations than 
Sweden. The next framework pro -
gramme, Horizon Europe, will be 
the world’s largest investment in research and innovation. For life 
sciences, the partnerships in the 
mission area ‘Cancer’ and part -
nership programmes will be key. 
The proposed Digital Europe 
programme for 2021–2027, which 
includes investments in AI and 
health data processing, is relevant 
in this context. In recent years and in collabo -
ration with industry and other 
stakeholders, the Government 
has invested in ‘innovation hubs’. 
Two examples are BioVentureHub, 
co-located at AstraZeneca in  
Mölndal, and Testa Center in 
Uppsala. The AstraZeneca  
BioVentureHub offers access to 
Sweden as a research and innovation nation
Sweden is one of the countries that invests the most in research, 
measured as a percentage of GDP. In 2018, the total expenditure 
for research and development conducted in Sweden amounted 
to approximately SEK 157 billion, corresponding to 3.3 per cent 
of GDP. Of this amount, public funding corresponded to  
0.9 per cent of GDP.
Sweden was named the EU innovative leader in 2019.
Sweden was the country that had the highest number of  
researchers per capita in 2015, and demonstrates a high level  
of scientific productivity, as measured by the number of  
publications per 1 000 inhabitants.
Swedish research is of high scientific standard. Sweden’s share of 
highly cited publications is just over 11 per cent, placing Sweden 
13th among the countries of the world.
The Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2020, 
which includes almost 1 400 universities across 92 countries,  
ranked five Swedish universities among the top 200: Karolinska  
Institutet (41), Lund University (96), Uppsala University (102),  
Stockholm University (175) and the University of Gothenburg (186).
Sources: Budget Bill for 2020 (Govt Bill 2019/20:1); European innovation scoreboard; Swedish Research 
Council, Swedish Research Barometer 2019;  Times Higher Education  World University Rankings 2020Sweden’s national life sciences strategy       31
Photo: Johan Persson, MAX IV, Lund university32        Sweden’s national life sciences strategythe company’s expertise and  
infrastructure for research groups 
from universities and higher  
education institutions and small 
enterprises in pharmaceuticals 
and medical technology. It has 
also initiated a mentoring scheme 
targeting university incubators 
and science parks. Testa Center  
offers environments and infra -
structure for research, development 
and production of biopharmaceuti -
cal products, targeting companies 
and research groups at universities 
and higher education institutions. 
Testa Center is part of a larger  
billion-kronor investment in  
biopharmaceuticals that the  
Government has made in collabo -
ration with private stakeholders. 
The initiative includes a national 
programme for protein research, 
method development and bio-  
pharmaceuticals production,  
and the Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, funded mainly 
by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg 
Foundation. 
Research and innovation in life 
sciences are completely dependent 
on access to advanced research  
infrastructure. Important Swedish 
facilities in this area include  
SciLifeLab, MAX IV and the 
Swedish National Infrastructure  
for Computing (SNIC).  
SciLifeLab is a national resource 
centre offering infrastructure of 
the highest international standard 
for molecular biosciences focus-  
ing on health and environmental 
research. The centre has facilities 
in Stockholm and Uppsala, but  
involves collaborative projects 
with a number of universities 
around the country. MAX IV  
Laboratory, outside Lund, has 
the world’s strongest synchrotron 
X-rays for materials and life  sciences research. In proximity  
to MAX IV, the European  
Spallation Source (ESS) is under 
construction. It is currently one of 
the largest, highest priority  
research infrastructure projects 
in Europe, hosted by Sweden and 
Denmark. The ESS will be fully 
operational in 2025 and will be 
the world’s most powerful neut -
ron source, with applications in 
drug development, for instance. 
All these infrastructures generate 
enormous volumes of data, which 
must be managed effectively and 
efficiently. Life sciences research 
is becoming increasingly data-  
driven, requiring advanced infra -
structures for data processing.
Higher education institutions that 
host research infrastructures  
generally offer access not only  
to equipment, but also to the 
staff, expertise and the  
Photo: AstraZenecaSweden’s national life sciences strategy       33Objectives
6.1 Strengthened cross-sectoral life sciences research 
In the Government’s view, cross-sectoral research and innovation that 
contribute to the sustainable development of health and wellbeing in 
line with the 2030 Agenda are a top priority. Free basic research is the 
foundation for being able to address health challenges in the long term.  
 
6.2 Excellent life sciences research infrastructure
The Government wants Swedish life sciences researchers to have  
access to high-quality research infrastructure and to strengthen 
Sweden’s position as a Big Science nation. 
6.3 Increased and broader use of research infrastructure 
The Government wants the use of Swedish research infrastructure to 
increase and wants users to represent a broad range of stakeholders  
to stimulate cross-sectoral collaboration. 
6.4 Strengthened infrastructures for data-driven research  
and innovation
The Government considers that there is a need to strengthen  
digital infrastructure – such as computational resources for calculations 
and analyses, cost-effective data storage, advanced user support and 
increased network capacity for digital communication – to enable the 
processing of greater volumes of increasingly complex data. 
6.5 Increased Swedish participation in EU programmes 
The Government wants stakeholders in Sweden to work actively to 
influence the implementation of the next research and innovation 
framework programme, Horizon Europe, so that it addresses Swedish 
needs, priorities and strengths. materials necessary to use the 
equipment. Advanced infra -
structure is an important platform 
for cross-sectoral collaboration. 
The business model for using  
research infrastructure therefore  
needs to be reviewed to enable 
these costs to be shared by users. 
State funding for the construction 
and operation of national and  
international research infra -
structures also needs to be re -
viewed to ensure the effective use 
of available funds to pay for both 
current and new investments. 34        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy7. Skills supply, talent attraction and lifelong learning
Skills supply for life sciences  
companies and the public sector 
must be ensured to enable Sweden 
to compete as a leading life sciences 
nation. In a globalised world, with 
increasing mobility of individuals, 
the labour market and educational 
institutions are becoming more 
and more international and  
competition is intensifying for 
both students and people with  
cutting-edge expertise. Continuing digital transformation, automation 
and globalisation of activities  
results in rapid changes in the 
skills required. Greater need for 
lifelong learning – in the form of 
in-service training and further 
education of practising professionals, 
and career change training –  
requires flexible solutions. 
Life sciences is a knowledge-  
intensive sector, often requiring specialised skills. Measures are 
needed both to effectively recruit  
internationally and to improve 
conditions nationally to produce 
the skills in demand. 
Sweden’s attractiveness as a study 
destination is dependent on many 
factors, including high-quality 
education, courses offered in  
English, gender-equal career 
paths, and conditions for a good 
study and social life for students. 
The Inquiry on increased interna -
tionalisation of higher education 
activities31 has described factors 
for internationalising both educa -
tion and research at universities 
and higher education institutions, 
and submitted proposals for mea -
sures to increase Sweden’s attrac -
tiveness as a study destination.  
A special visa for highly qualified 
people wanting to apply for jobs or 
start a business will be introduced 
on 1 January 2021. The aim is to 
facilitate collaboration with inter -
nationally leading research and 
innovation environments, and  
attract and retain international 
cutting-edge expertise.
Skills supply is currently a parti -
cular challenge for the segment 
of the life sciences industry with 
production in Sweden.32  This  
segment generates a continuous 
need for specialist expertise in 
areas such as automation, ‘lean’ 31SOU 2018:3 Internationalisation of Swedish Higher Education and Research – A Strategic Agenda.
32N2015/08694/IF Assignment on a national programme for protein research, method development  
and biopharmaceuticals production (in Swedish).
Photo: Department of Philosophy, Lund UniversitySweden’s national life sciences strategy       35methodology, analysis, process  
engineering, chemical engineering 
and good manufacturing prac-  
tices. The major pharmaceutical 
companies have traditionally func -
tioned as a base for further  
training in drug development,  
but as the number of these com-  
panies have declined, skills supply 
in the area has become problem-  
atic. One way of managing this 
problem is by actively making the 
skills in major companies avail-  
able to small enterprises. 
The welfare sector is also  
facing major challenges in terms 
of future skills supply. The National 
Board of Health and Welfare’s 
survey33 of supply and demand of 
licensed health care staff found 
that the regions consider that 
there is a shortage of staff in  
several regulated professions, 
despite a general increase in  
supply of licensed staff over time. 
One reason for this is considered  
to be the increased demand for 
care services. Care conducted at 
university hospitals plays a key 
role in fulfilling the health care 
system’s mandate to perform  
clinical research. This involves  
special needs in the form of  
research-trained staff.
 
It is also essential to better  
harness the knowledge and ideas 
available in health care and social 
services. Involving those working 
in the health and social care  
sector in product and service  
development increases the poten -
tial to achieve functional out-  
comes. This also raises skill levels, 
both in the health and social care 
sector and in the companies  
developing health and assistive 
technologies. Objectives
7.1 Good opportunities for lifelong learning
The Government considers that there must be good opportunities  
for lifelong learning. This is important for the life sciences sector,  
where knowledge is advancing at a rapid pace and the skills required can 
change quickly. Cross-sectoral staff mobility is also encouraged.
7.2 Effective collaboration to ensure skills supply 
The Government considers that effective collaboration and a cross-  
sectoral approach is necessary to ensure long-term skills supply in the 
life sciences sector. It is essential that future challenges are managed in 
collaboration with the education sector and employers in life sciences.
7.3 Offering competitive conditions to recruit internationally
The Government wants conditions in place to enable employers in 
Sweden to recruit international expertise in the life sciences sector. 
33Assessment of supply and demand of licensed staff in health and dental care,   
National Board of Health and Welfare report, 2019 (in Swedish).36        Sweden’s national life sciences strategy8. International attractiveness and competitiveness
Investments and export promo -
tion are two fundamental compo -
nents of the internationalisation 
of Swedish life sciences. To ensure 
that Sweden is an attractive invest -
ment country in a global and  
digital knowledge-based society,  
it is crucial to be able to offer  
an environment that includes 
world-leading universities and 
higher education institutions, an 
innovative and high-quality health 
care system, and government 
agencies with a clear mandate to 
contribute to policy develop-  
ment and innovation at system 
level. Close collaboration with 
our Nordic neighbours is, in some 
areas, a prerequisite for achieving 
attractive environments. Coopera -
tion with the United Kingdom is 
also vital for Swedish stakeholders. 
In the Horizon 2020 framework 
programme, ‘Societal Challenge 1 – 
Health, Demographic Change and 
Wellbeing’, the UK is Sweden’s 
most important partner country. 
With its outstanding life sciences 
sector, the UK will continue to  
be an important partner in the  
future too. Innovation partner-  
ships with France, Germany and 
India will also create opportuni -
ties for in-depth partnership  
projects and policy advocacy. 
Research infrastructures, test beds 
and incubators with links to  
universities and higher education institutions or global life sciences 
companies, higher education in -
stitutions’ innovation offices and 
holding companies all play an  
important role in the innovation 
system supporting life sciences.  
A structure for long-term collabo -
ration between the country’s busi -
ness incubators, with cutting-  
edge expertise in life sciences, is 
essential to ensure high interna -
tional standards in the business 
incubator process.
Actively monitoring international 
developments and analysing  
advances in the life sciences  
sector in Sweden, at both national 
and regional level, is important to 
be able to market Sweden’s life  sciences offerings. The Offices of  
Science and Innovation at 
Sweden’s embassies in Beijing, 
Brasilia, New Delhi, Seoul, Tokyo 
and Washington DC have been 
tasked with analysing strategic  
initiatives in their respective 
countries that are relevant for all 
the innovation partnership  
programmes, including the  
programme for health and life 
sciences. Business Sweden and 
Swecare are also important actors in 
investment and export promotion. 
Under the name ‘Team Sweden’, 
they work in partnership with  
other stakeholders in the sector to 
promote life sciences exports. 
Sweden currently has a relatively 
Photo: Erik Flyg, Karolinska InstitutetSweden’s national life sciences strategy       37large and growing number of life 
sciences companies in the start-up 
phase. The high number of initial 
public offerings of such compa -
nies, particularly on active small 
cap equity markets, is unique in 
an international perspective. Yet 
the number of venture capitalist 
investors has fallen from around 
ten at the turn of the millennium 
to currently two – including  
Industrifonden – that specialise in 
life sciences. As the listing  
environment and stock markets 
can change rapidly, and the  
refinancing cycles for life sciences 
companies are becoming ever 
shorter, private and public venture 
capital is a very important source 
of financing. 
Early investments with high or 
difficult-to-assess risk levels and/
or delayed returns (which charac -
terise the life sciences sector)  
generally have difficulty attract-  
ing private financing. Central  
government investments in life  
sciences have also sought out  
companies in later development 
phases in recent years. Saminvest 
AB is a wholly state-owned  
venture capital company that  
invests indirectly through privately 
managed funds using a ‘fund of 
fund’ structure. In partnership 
with private stakeholders,  
Saminvest has established a new 
venture capital fund focused on 
Nordic life sciences companies. 
Competitive framework conditions 
for companies investing in research 
are important for the localisation of 
global companies. The conditions 
and working methods of regulatory 
authorities are also important.  
Intellectual property law is also part 
of the framework that is the basis 
for innovation, company formation, 
product development, collaboration 
and trade. 8.1 Better business environment for research and development 
The Government intends to raise the ‘R&D deduction’ to facilitate 
Swedish industry’s continued investment in new technology and 
high-knowledge content. 
 
8.2 Increased export and investment promotion
In line with the Government’s export and investment strategy, Sweden 
should be positioned and marketed as a country of choice for global 
stakeholders when it comes to establishment, investment, and  
research and innovation collaboration in the life sciences sector,  
including in precision medicine. 
8.3 World-class business incubators
The Government considers that it is important for Sweden to be able to 
offer competitive business incubators. Growth companies in the life  
sciences sector need access to world-class expertise, regardless of 
where in the country the company is located.  
8.4 Continuous monitoring, analysis and follow-up 
The Government considers that continuous analysis and follow-up of 
life sciences, both nationally and internationally, is essential. Knowledge 
about Sweden’s performance in relation to comparable countries is 
imperative if Sweden is to market itself as a country of choice for life 
sciences investment. Objectives
Photo: Erik Flyg, Karolinska InstitutetSweden’s national life sciences strategy       39
Government Offices of Sweden
Switchboard: +46 8–405 10 00
www.government.se