1 
 Inception  Impact Assessment for Sustainable Product Initiative  
 
We thank the European Commission for the opportunity to provide comments to the IIA on 
SPI. 
 
We are a working group for the use of Circular Design  as a tool to meet the challenges of a 
Climate neutral industry  within the Swedish Government’s innovation partnership program . 
We welcome the EU Commission's action plan on circular economy  and the initiative on 
Sustainable Product Initiative as it has the potential to facilitate a functioning market in 
Europe for secondary raw materials and circular products  as well as increased usage of 
products . Many Swedish business es are already at the forefront of changing from a linear to 
a circular economy  and the rest will follow . We would welcome a common ambitious strategy 
in Europe  and wants to take a consultative  role in its development. We have only commented 
on the environmental and financial aspects of the proposed impacts and not the social 
aspects which are out of our scope of circular design.  
 
Circular design tools are used by many businesses in Sweden and they are  already 
developing and implementing new circular business models. The tools are used in order to 
provide more circular products and services with definitions as durability, reusability, 
reparability, upgradability, recyclability and resource and efficiency needs. The producer 
needs to ensure a sustainable and safe produc t.  
 
The group  has the following comments and proposal to the IIA  
We are positive to the initiative to extend the Ecodesign Directive to a wider range of product  
groups . We recommend that the requirements in framework of the Ecodesign Directive are 
used in the new product sustainability directive.  
 
We encourage the use of circular design principles  and encourages the European 
Commission to apply the principles to the Eco -design Directive, and the underlying product 
regulations . This enables  to make measurable demands on products  and for companies and 
designers to ensure that the product is as sustainable as possible during its lifespan both up 
streams and down str eams and when disposed .  
 
1. Build on what exists  and a s much as possible shall be regulated in as few laws as 
possible.  We would like to underline the importance to keep in mind that when broadening 
the scope of the Ecodesign Directive this needs to be do ne in coherence with existing EU 
legislation .  
 
Energy efficiency, resource efficiency and minimizing the risks and impacts of chemicals 
substances on the environment are important objectives in the new product sustainable 
directive. Policy objectives, policy choices and incentives across all policy area s need to be 
both clear and consistently implemented, including potentially inevitable trade -offs, to create 
the market for sustainable circular business models such as for example carpools and 
opportunities from a life cycle perspective. It is important t o create the market through 
coherent policy objectives throughout all strands of policies. Addressing the Interface 
between Chemicals, Products and Waste regulations is necessary to achieve the ambition 
of the Commission regarding the environment.  2 
  
2. Ens ure that the product sustainability requirements will be harmonized  at EU level.  
Through the experience we have until today, a well -functioning internal market will be the 
basis for circular business models to function internationally. The New Legislative framework 
should be applied to all product legislation and rules must be harmoniz ed within the EU.  
 
A harmonized regulatory framework within the EU makes it easier for companies to sell 
products as a service, in order to better reuse and renovate recycled material. Partnerships 
and collaborations between different actors also benefit from a common regulatory 
framework in the internal market. Rules that mean that national borders within the EU give 
different requirements lead to increased bureaucracy and special requirements. This 
damages the market and hinders the growth of the  circular economy. The chemical tax in 
Sweden is one such example.  
 
As a conclusion we urge policymakers to undertake the following aspects when developing 
both product and information requirements. A consultation and legislative proposals need to 
be follo wed by an impact assessment. And when establishing new legislative requirements, 
we invite the Commission to apply the “SMERC" principle, that stands for:  
   
• Specific  – requirements must be considered on a product group -specific basis. Even 
within the same  product group and within individual categories of equipment in our 
sector, the products and their environmental impact differ significantly, especially 
depending on ambient and operating conditions.  
• Measurability  – the parameters must be clear to determi ne, and measurement 
methods must be accurately defined.  
• Enforceability  – it must be possible to verify and enforce requirements through 
market surveillance.  
• Relevance  – new parameters and corresponding requirements must be relevant for 
the environment, th e users and relevant even within specific life cycle phase(s). There 
must be evidence of clear and significant potential for improvement.   
• Competitiveness  – there must be no significant negative impact on the industry’s 
competitiveness and the competition  must be fair.  
 
Policy makers have a responsibility to secure that the regulatory context will support the 
development without limit heathy business and existing products on the market. 
Policymakers need also the follow the developments of circular business models and redu ce 
and eliminate legal obstacles circular material flows.  
 
3. Standardization of all nomenclature and definitions in the area of circular economy is 
needed.  For example, definitions as durability, reusability, reparability, upgradability, 
recyclabil ity and resource and efficiency needs to be defined and adapted based on product 
type categories in order to consider the purpose, use and lifespan of products . For example, 
all exact definitions for any circular criteria’s needs clarification. Standards are essential 
complementing tools to EU legislation for a Circular economy and they enhance the 
sustainability of products and materials.  
 3 
 4. There is a need of  a holistic view  - all proposed product sustainability requirements must 
be evaluated through the whole lifecycle to ensure they will lead to more sustainable 
products. They should also be analyzed in the usage environment for the specific product.  
The SPI should pinpoint how incentives can be made along the value chain, to attract players 
to develop business models, re -use models, and upcycling of materials much quicker.  
 
The same sustainable product development “recipe” cannot be applied uniformly across  all 
product types. a policy tool that allows us to incorporate product -relevant differences is 
needed. Refrain from applying simplified concepts to define sustainable products. Instead, 
secure tailor -made product category criteria . 
 
The design of the principles will be of utmost importance for the future work of the respective 
business sectors work on product development. Principles needs to be developed per 
product category as this should be the only way forward. It is therefore cruc ial that these 
principles are discussed at an early stage with the parts involved  to ensure usability for 
the sector and to make sure they are designed in a way that will produce the desired effect.  
 
5. We need to watch out for unintended effects  and to ma ke sure that the proposed 
measures are proportionate to the intended objectives.  Policy makers should focus on 
products that all together stand for a great environmental impact so that the effect of 
legislation is proportionate.  The benefits of product req uirements (increased safety / reduced 
environmental impact / lower energy consumption) must always be weighed against their 
cost.  
 
The Commission should strive for requirements that will enable the future adaptive and 
continuous development  of resource -efficient design. Circular design principles and 
requirements from them, should be established as a second step to make sure that sub 
optimization on products will not be the case  
 
We must recognize that different products face different condi tions. And we need to have the 
possibility too choose different innovative solutions. Circular business models based on 
refurbished products, the use of biobased materials or the use of recycled materials in 
products are by definition market -based solution s that contribute to making product use 
more resource efficient and thus more sustainable. Refrain from introducing a mandatory 
recycled content for a product to be sustainable. There is no one -size-fits-all solution.  
 
The legislation shall not prevent th e repair of older products. Some concepts have proven to 
be very difficult to define, such as the lifespan of a product with the term durability. These 
concepts should not be introduced into legislation until they have been clearly analyzed in 
terms of the ir relevance to resource efficiency and relevant contribution to the circular 
economy.  
 
Specific comments on “ Mandatory sustainability labelling  and digital product 
passport ”  
In general, we are positive to a standardized sustainability labelling  to help consumers, 
public and private procurement  make better choices  when choosing products or 
consumables .  
  4 
 To be able to compare products we need comparable data  and access to the right 
information. We would like it to be a science -based tool with uniform criteria to minimize 
costs for specifically, but not limited to, SMEs.  
 
We must always consider the environmental benefit of uniform labelling and set minimum 
criteria to avoid greenwashing.  It is important that only the information that is meaningful and 
motivated is communicated to the customers to avoid confusion and extra costs. Given that 
products have different uses, purpose, this type of information can vary widely. Important 
aspects are to ensure that the information is reliable and comparable.  
 
Today we have numerous labeling on different environmental and sustainabili ty information to 
customers. This information is delivered to consumers  through a variety of different labels 
and other tools  across the union, making it difficult to choose the best products. This is not 
only confusing for the customers but is also expensive to companies  having to register for 
many  national and international systems in European countries  to be on the local markets . 
The issue of communication sustainability information through labels to the customer 
regarding products should be discus sed in connection with the establishment of regulatory 
requirements.   
 
Not all information about products should necessarily go into a physical labelling attached to 
the product itself. Information could be also communicated with other means (in store or 
online) depending on when it is most beneficial to the costumer. We reco mmend that we first 
assess what is relevant for each product group and then decide if and how to inform the 
consumer.  
 
Today's Ecodesign directive works in conjunction with the Energy Labeling Directive. The 
Ecodesign directive aim is to ensure that the worst products disappear from the market and 
the Energy Labeling Directive aims to create competition among the best in r espect to the 
energy efficiency through communication with the label in order to increase the demand for 
even more efficient products. Similarly, this tandem type of legislation should also be 
discussed when establishing a new Sustainable Product Directive . With sustaina bility 
requirements for products, the discussion and establishment of requirements becomes very 
decisive for the type of mandatory communicative requirements that can be placed on 
producers.  
 
The information requirements need to be easy to u nderstand and use for the buyer of the 
product. The information will be used for different purposes depending on whether it is a 
product used as a component of a larger complex product or whether it is a consumer 
product to be used by a private individual.  
 
Common parameters need to exist and crucial for a well -functioning market is that the 
information requirements are clear, precise and provide value for the recipient of information. 
How they are to be communicated is a question appropriate for the standa rdization to 
establish methods for.  
 5 
 Effective supervision, monitoring and control is important to ensure that the coming directive 
is followed.  
 
We are positive to the Europe European Commission’s  proposal for a tool for sharing product 
information digitally, including a product passport . We acknowledge the European 
Commission’s proposal for developing a harmonized tool for sharing product information 
digitally, including a product passport. Using new digital technolo gies throughout the value 
chains gives transparent and reliable information to the consumer.  
 
The passports need  to be different for different product groups  and developed in cooperation 
with respective business sector . Otherwise the risk is for producers to provide information 
and the administrative burden related to that is not beneficial for environmental aspects for 
some products as well as missing importa nt information for others.  
 
We need new and improved standards for reporting and sharing information. If not, there is 
significant risk that different, non -comparable product passes are developed.  Rules regarding 
what information is to be shared in these systems need to be demand -driven so that relevant 
information is shared. When needed, you can gradually develop and test technical systems 
for digital information transmission between those who put products on the market and those 
who recycle the m. It is i mportant that these requirements and systems do not drive costs in 
the recycling phase . If so, it will effectively  hinder international competitiveness. At the start 
we need to  strictly  limit information to what is relevant and necessary for the purpose, but in 
time this can be scaled up when the system is in place  and has been tested.  
 
Stockholm November 16  
 
 
Cecilia Tall  
Spokesperson of the group  
(contact details: Cecilia.tall@teko.se  or +46 733500100)  
Supported by:  
Jonas Carlehed (IKEA  Retail Sweden ) 
Malin Frenning (AFRY)  
Jon Haag (RISE)  
Thomas Hörnfeldt (SSAB)  
Eva Karlsson, (Houdini)  
Elinor Kruse (Teknikföretagen)  
Carina Qvarngård (Ragn -Sells)  
Åsa Stenmark ( Naturvårdsverket)  
Anna Velander Gissl én (SVID)  
Anna Wiberg (Bioinnovation)  
 
 
