 
 Knowledge Transfer Partnerships 
Evaluation  
Final  Report  
 
 August  2023   
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Contents  
Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  i 
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 1 
2. Overview of KTP scheme  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
3. Overview of KTP projects  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  10 
4. Design and implementation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 19 
5. Firm -level outcomes and impacts  ................................ ................................ .............................  30 
6. Associate outcomes and impacts  ................................ ................................ .............................  47 
7. Knowledge base outcomes and impacts  ................................ ................................ ................  60 
8. Impacts of the KTP scheme on place  ................................ ................................ ........................  70 
9. Quantified impact analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  74 
10. Factors influencing KTP performance  ................................ ................................ ......................  83 
11. Contribution and Value -for-Money analysis  ................................ ................................ ..........  89 
12. Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  97 
 
Annex A: Key findings and notes on the evidence  ................................ ................................ ... A-1 
Annex B: List of consultees ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  B-1 
Annex C: Theories of Change and underpinning assumptions  ................................ ................  C-1 
Annex D: Further data on surveys  ................................ ................................ ................................  D-1 
Annex E: Detailed methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... E-1 
Contact:  
Rebecca Pates  
Tel:  0161 475 2112  
email:  rpates@sqw.co.uk  Approved by:  
 Jonathan Cook  
 Director  
Date: 31/08/2023  
 
Disclaimer  
This report takes into account the particular instructions and requirements of our client.  It is not intended for, and shoul d not be relied upon by, 
any third party and no responsibility is undertaken to any third party.  
Whilst SQW has used reasonable care and skill throughout, it is unable to warrant either the accuracy or completeness of info rmation supplied by 
the client or third parties, and it does no t accept responsibility for any legal, commercial or other consequences that arise from its use.  
ONS Secure Research Service Disclaimer  
This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown Copyright. The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the 
endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research dataset s which may not exactly 
reproduce National Statistics aggregates.  i 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Executive Summary  
1. The KTP scheme was established over 45 years ago and aims to ‘ help businesses in the UK 
to innovate and grow ’.  The scheme creates and supports three -way partnerships between a 
business , a Knowledge Base partner (KB, e.g. a university or college) and an individual 
associate  (e.g. post -graduate) who is embedded within the business .  KTPs are specific and 
strategic innovation projects with a commercial focus, drawing on new skills and the latest 
academic thinking. Projects are typically 12 to 36 months in length. The scheme employs 
Knowledge Transfer Advisors (KTAs), who work in partnership with KBs across the UK to 
help to form partnerships and provide support during project delivery.  SQW, in partnership 
with Qa Research, was commissioned by Innovate UK and UKRI to evaluate the KTP scheme 
between 2010 and 2020.  Key statistics for KTPs 
2010 -2020  ❖ Innovate UK invested  £223m in KTP projects, with KTP grants  typically 
averaging £80 -100k per project .  Just over 2,100  projects were completed 
over this period.  
❖ KTP  projects engaged with nearly 1,900 businesses  (of wh ich 15% were 
micro, 36% were small, 24% were medium and 25% large in size), 136 KB 
institutions  and over 3,000 associates .   
❖ KTP projects were well distributed across the UK , with 75% of beneficiary 
businesses and 68% of the KB partners being outside of Londo n and the 
Greater South East.   
Key findings  
Overall performance  
2. Overall, the KTP scheme has achieved its core objective of helping businesses in the UK to 
innovate and grow, and has made a substantial contribution to the UK economy.    Economic impact  
❖ KTPs between 2010 and 2020 have generated an estimated £1.7 to £2.3 
billion in net GVA for the UK economy . These impacts are based on the 
estimated effects on business growth and on the earnings of associates.  
❖ The scheme has delivered strong value for money over this period: for every 
pound of public and private investmen t, the scheme has generated a 
return of £4.20 to £5. 50 in net economic benefits.  
Design and implementation  
3. The scheme aligns well with Government priorities for innovation  and with  strategic 
priorities of KB institutions , which  have become more closely aligned with KTPs over the 
evaluation period with an  increasing require ment  to demonstrate impact , including through ii 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  knowledge exchange .  KTPs are viewed as important in the innovatio n ecosystem and do not 
duplicate other forms of support . The scheme could be better aligned and integrated with 
the wider innovation support landscape in practice , and this could help to maximise the 
benefits of KTPs further and attract new types of applic ant that may not have collaborated 
with the KB previously  – see recommendations below .  Overall levels of satisfaction with 
KTP processes and project implementation were high , although feedback on the associate 
recruitment processes and marketing/promotion  of the scheme were mixed.  
Business benefits  
4. The KTP scheme has helped businesses  to mitigate the risk of investing in innovation, 
addressing resource constraints and, to some extent, information failures for both businesses 
and academics that hindered col laboration.  KTP resources have been focused on projects that 
were strategically important to most of the businesses participating.  
5. KTPs have helped businesses  to undertake both product and process innovation .  This has 
led to business performance improvem ents.  According to the econometric analysis, impacts 
on the growth rate of employment and turnover were statistically significant , and were 
sustained throughout the KTP and for three years following completion.  Wider feedback 
suggest ed that KTPs have led to high quality jobs and helped businesses to generate 
additional turnover from exports.  Whilst some businesses reported benefits to productivity, 
the econometric analysis found that impacts on productivity were not statistically signi ficant. 
That said, KTPs have helped to strengthen the underpinning drivers of productivity , such 
as skills, R&D investment and process innovation.   Outcomes  were  still being attributed to 
the KTP, even where the project finished a number of years ago, dem onstrating the 
sustainability of outcomes .  KTPs have influenc ed businesses’  perceptions of, and capability 
to undertake, R&D , thereby making future innovation activities more likely. The evidence 
indicated that many of the relationships between businesses  and KB partners were pre -
existing, and these have often been strengthened and have continued since the project ended.  Business benefits  Of the 86 KTP beneficiary businesses  surveyed ….  
❖ 65%  had introduced new processes/practices  
❖ 70%  had improved existing products or services  
❖ 57%  had progressed new products/services to market  
❖ 83%  had already experienced or expected an increase in at least one of the 
following: productivity, profitability, e mployment and/or turnover  
❖ 87%  had improved their technical knowledge and skills  
❖ 66% had improved their capability to introduce other performance 
enhancing practices  
❖ 79% placed greater value on academic expertise and were now better able to 
engage with KBs  
… as a result of KTPs  iii 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Academic benefits  
6. KTPs have enabled academic partners to strengthen their knowledge of industry challenges, 
leading to more industry -relevant research and teaching materials,  academic 
publications, and helping them to lever further f unding .  KTPs have helped to strengthen the 
ability  of academics  to engage with businesses and transfer knowledge.  KTPs have also 
helped to progress academic careers, and a small number have generated IP and/or spinout 
businesses.  KTPs have  had  a legacy effect for academics : almost all academics surveyed 
said the benefits gained from the KTP were sustained after it was completed and the majority 
of those academics continue d to reap the benefits.  
7. KTPs have generate d wider benefits for the KB institution , including improved profile and 
credibility, providing material on impact for REF/KEF case studies, and widening and 
strengthening business networks.  There was  evidence t hat demonstrate d how KTPs have 
influenced attitudes towards business enga gement and innovation at an institutional level.  
The cross -disciplinary nature of some KTP projects has also helped to strengthen 
relationships within institutions.     Academic benefits  Of the 93 KTP academic partners surveyed ….  
❖ 92%  reported an improved in their knowledge of industry challenges  
❖ 81%  had developed more industry -relevant research    
❖ 75%  had developed more industry -relevant teaching  
❖ 62% had generated publications   
❖ 51%  had levered further commercial funding  
❖ 48% had progr essed their career  
… as a result of KTPs  
Associate benefits  
8. There was strong evidence to show that associates have increased their knowledge, skills 
and capabilities  from KTPs, which included technical, commercialisation and business 
related skills. For the majority, the KTP has raised career ambitions and accelerated 
career progression  (particularly for those within industry). KTPs have positively impacted 
upon assoc iates’ employment opportunities and their earnings  over the course of their 
career.  Many associates secured a job at the KTP business partner after the project ended, 
and almost all associates surveyed are now in employment in industry or academia.  
Knowl edge gained through KTPs has been disseminated more widely, with examples from 
both industry and academia, although the subsequent effects on third parties could not be 
confirmed in this study.  iv 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  ssociate benefits  Of the 400 KTP associates surveyed ….  
❖ 93%  improved their applied research and technical skills  
❖ 82%  improved their business skills (e.g. project and business management, 
professional and interpersonal skills)  
❖ 77% improved their skills/capabilities in business innovation and 
commercialisation processe s 
❖ 78% raised their career ambitions and  65% accelerated career progression 
within industry  
❖ 19%  had created or were involved in the creation of new business start -ups 
(136 new businesses in total)  
… as a result of KTPs  
Additionality and contribution of KTPs  
9. The majority of outcomes described above were partially or (to a lesser extent) fully 
addit ional,  and there was strong evidence to suggest that KTPs have made a key difference 
in bringing about outcomes, often alongside other factors. For all partners surveyed, full 
deadweight was very low, indicating that very few would have achieved all the ou tcomes 
anyway without that support. Evidence on the relative contribution of KTPs suggested that 
the scheme did play an important – and in some cases critical – role in generating the 
outcomes observed .  It is important to recognise that these outcomes hav e often been 
achieved in combination with other factors.  KTPs often  formed  part of wider business 
development plans and the businesses  often ha d prior experience of innovation and working 
with academia . The academics involved often had a track record of w orking with and/or in 
industry.  
Success factors  
10. The evidence demonstrates how the KTP model is effective in facilitating knowledge transfer 
between partners.  The three -way, industry -led partnership  and dedicated resource for 
an associate that is embedded in the business  have been key to this.  Other key factors that 
influenced the success of KTPs included: having  a strong and realistic plan at the outset, with 
alignment of goals and buy -in from all partners; close alignment between expertise and need; 
and having a well -structured project.  Within the business, strategic fit and prioritisation of 
the KTP by the lea dership team was important, alongside buy -in across other relevant teams.  
The fit, motivation, capability and calibre of the associate was “instrumental” to the success. 
Proximity between partners can be helpful, but was not always necessary.  The locatio n, 
sector of the business, and the size of the KTP grant  were not significant determinants of the 
effects on business growth as a result of the KTP. This highlights their potential role across  
different types of business, and  all places and sectors.  v 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Wider benefits  
11. Above and beyond the direct benefits for those involved in the KTP scheme, there was some 
evidence for potential  spillovers.  This included academics sharing the knowledge gained 
through KTPs with other academics and businesses, and associates tak ing the skills and 
knowledge gained with them as they progressed their careers in other organisations.   
Recommendations  and key lessons  
12. Overall, as set out above, the KTP scheme achieved significant impact over the 2010 -2020 
period, with strong evidence of outcomes for the three partners involved in line with the 
underlying programme logic. The recommendations and lessons to consider are made in this 
context.  
Demand and reach of the scheme  
13. The evidence in the report has demonstrated that the dema nd for, and reach of, the scheme is 
broad. A few areas have been identified where this could be developed further to increase 
access to the scheme by businesses  who are less active in relation to innovation and/or 
engagement with the knowledge base, and fo r projects that may be less commercially -
focused. This may require additional resources for the scheme.  
• The application process/forms and criteria were thought to be potential barriers to 
projects that have a focus on social/environmental rather than comm ercial aims. These 
should be revisited to ensure that they are aligned with potential projects in these fields.  
• The majority of businesses were innovation -active and/or had prior experience working 
with the knowledge base before their KTP. The evidence als o indicated that KTPs have 
often been used as part of a business’s wider package of development activities to support 
growth. Two options for expanding reach to businesses that are newer to innovation 
and/or collaboration with the knowledge base could be t o: tap into the wider business 
support landscape to attract new applicants, including those within UKRI (e.g. EDGE) and 
those outside (e.g. linking to export support or schemes such as Help to Grow); and 
consider shorter KTPs, thereby reducing the investme nt required for those businesses 
new to innovation. Actions here may require additional resource for programme delivery.  
• Supporting the two previous points, communications on the potential business benefits 
and on projects with social or environmental obje ctives may help to broaden access.  
• A key lesson from the evaluation was the need for senior buy -in within KB institutions to 
KTPs and the existence of individuals within relevant technology transfer/enterprise 
offices with the drive to promote them and mak e them happen. KB institutions should 
therefore engage and periodically re -engage with senior leaders, highlighting the benefits 
that KTPs can bring.  vi 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Implementation  
14. The evaluation found a number of key facets that were important in supporting the impact of  
KTP projects, particularly around the partnership and the three parties involved in this. These 
provide lessons for those that are involved in instigating, developing and supporting projects 
so that impact can be maximised. Key areas of good practice for dissemination are as follows:  
• Associate recruitment is important to ensure a suitable candidate is found. Processes that 
can support this include speed of action upon project approval and ensuring the post is 
seen as attractive. The range of benefits to as sociates found in this evaluation, including 
for those wishing to pursue careers in industry, academia or at the interface of the two 
can help to promote these posts.  
• A KTP plan that is developed post -award, including with clear goals and shared and well -
understood ways of working, was found to be key to success. This could be a useful check 
for KTAs, and provides an important first milestone for the parties involved.  
• Capacity and buy -in within business was a key factor in success. A senior representative 
of the business with ownership of the KTP project helps to ensure that this is in place.  
• The institutional capacity of the knowledge base partner to support the project during 
delivery was found to be an important factor in success. KB representatives shoul d note 
this, particularly if academic partners have less previous experience in working with 
industry, and so may require additional support. The support role provided by KB 
representatives includes taking on administrative tasks such as meeting minutes an d 
claims processes.  
15. Finally on implementation, monitoring data to help facilitate the evaluation could have been 
better, in particular in relation to close out data and contact information. This may reflect that 
the period subject to the study went back to  2010. That said, it is critical for monitoring 
information to be captured and maintained to enable future evaluation. A useful action would 
be to check, update and add secondary details for key contacts at the end of the KTP.  
Wider aspects  
16. KTPs were seen as distinctive in the innovation landscape. However, it was not clear how they 
fit or complemented other support in practice, and there was a perception that some in UKRI 
had a lack of understanding of the role of KTPs. As well as the potential for tapping  into 
schemes such as EDGE (see above), two other key issues should be considered:  
• Communications and profile -raising within UKRI on the role of KTPs in their existing form 
could help encourage better integration with other existing activities, e.g. with t hose of 
Research Councils. This could highlight the various routes to impacts that KTPs can have, 
and so prompt more consideration on how they could align with other schemes. Key 
relevant routes include: increasing the application of research into industry  and wider 
contexts; as a means of developing human capital for innovation, including at the vii 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  important interface between research and industry; and to support innovation and 
growth in businesses.  
• There was some ad hoc evidence on the role of KTPs in contri buting to place -based 
aspects. Whilst not part of KTP design, a key question is whether there is scope to 
maximise place -based impacts further in future.  This would need to be actively instigated 
by Innovate UK and/or by local partners, likely on a case -by-case basis.   1 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  1. Introduction  
Introducing the Knowledge Transfer Partnership (KTP) scheme  
1.1 The KTP scheme was established over 45 years ago and aims to deliver UK economic growth 
through supporting commercialisation.  The scheme  creates and supports three -way 
partnerships between a business, a Knowledge Base partner  (e.g. a university or college ) and 
an individual (associate) to deliver a specific, strat egic innovation project using new skills and 
the latest academic thinking.  Between 2010 and 2020, Innovate UK invested £223m in just 
over 2 ,100 completed projects. These completed projects engaged with nearly  1,900 
businesses, 1 36 Knowledge Base institutions and over 3 ,000 associates across the UK.   
Evaluation aims and approach  
1.2 Innovate UK on behalf of UKRI commissioned SQW, in partnership with Qa Research, to 
evaluate the KTP scheme , covering the  projects supported  between 2010 and 2020 . The aim s 
of this study were to assess the effectiveness and impact of KTPs, and the scheme ’s overall 
performance against its objectives.   This included an assessment of impact of the KTP scheme  
(including long -term benefits) on businesses, the Knowledge Base (‘KB’ ) and associates  
directly involved in KTP projects , and wider impacts of the scheme , including the impact on 
the UK economy .  More detailed research questions are summarised below.  
Table 1-1: Key Research Questions  
  
KTP 
businesses  • To what extent does a KTP (i) generate innovation outcomes, (ii) impact on 
overall business performance, and (iii) deliver wider outcomes for the 
business, during and after the projec t? 
Knowledge 
Base  • To what extent does a KTP deliver outcomes for the Knowledge Base, during 
and after the project - at a project and institutional level?  
Associates  • To what extent does involvement in a KTP benefit the associates involved, 
during and after the project?  
Cross -cutting 
questions  • Do KTP or partner characteristics influence key outcomes achieved?  
• What factors have enabled or impeded outcomes?  
• How effectively is the KTP scheme aligned with the wider innovation 
landscape?  
• What motivates part ners to engage with KTPs and who initiates KTPs?  
• Are there mechanisms through which KTPs bring about regional impacts?  
Overall 
performance  • Overall, to what extent has the KTP scheme achieved its objectives?  
• To what extent does the KTP Scheme contribute to  the UK economy?  
• Is the scheme  providing value for money?  
• How could the KTP scheme be improved to maximise its relevance and 
impact?  
Source: SQW  2 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  1.3 The evaluation adopted a theory -based approach, using the logic model and theories of 
change as a framework to assess whether and how KTPs have brought about intended 
outcomes and impacts.  We have used contribution analysis to assess the scheme’s 
contribu tion to observed outcomes and impacts, whilst considering other factors which may 
have contributed to these benefits. This analysis was supported by quasi -experimental 
analysis (using Difference -in-Difference methodologies) to assess and quantify the schem e’s 
impact on key outcome measures  for the businesses involved in KTPs . 
1.4 We adopt ed a mixed method approach, combining quantitative and qualitative research .  As 
illustrated in Figure 1-1, this include d analysis of monitoring and close  out data1, econometric  
analysis , consultations with internal/external stakeholders and Knowledge Base 
representatives (e.g. KTP managers, business development managers or technology transfer 
officers at universities), sur vey work with businesses, associates and academics involved in 
projects and non -beneficiary businesses  who were rejected or withdrew from the scheme2, 
and in -depth case studies with 20 projects.  Please turn to Annex A for a list of individuals 
consulted for the evaluation and Annex C for further details on the methodology.  
Figure 1-1: Methodology  
 
Source: SQW  
 
1 Note, the quality of close  out data was limited in places, and therefore it has not been possible to use 
this database as much as intended.  
2 I.e. their KTP application was approved, but they did not start the project.   The response rate to the 
non-beneficiary survey was very low, so it has not been possible to use the results in this report  
3 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Report structure  
1.5 This report is structured as follows:  
• Section 2 provides an overview of KTP scheme .  
• Section 3 summarises  KTP expenditure and projects supported between 2010 and 2020, 
and characterises partners involved in the  KTP projects .  
• Section 4 provides feedback on KTP d esign and implementation .   
• Section s 5 to 7 present evidence on outcom es for businesses , associates and the 
Knowledge Base respectively . These sections include case studies of KTP projects funded 
over the period to provide examples of the outcomes reported as well as illustrating the 
background to projects, their other benef its and success factors.  
• Section 8 explores wider impacts associated with KTPs, including place -based impacts .  
• Section 9 provides a monetary  estimate of the impact of KTPs, based on evidenced impacts 
on businesses and associates .   
• Section 10 discusses f actors influencing KTP performance .  
• Section 11 provides the overall assessment of the  contribution and value for money 
associated with the KTP scheme . 
• Section 12 summarises the c onclusions and lessons.  
1.6 The report is supported by five annexes:  Annex A provides a summary of key findings, as 
requested by UKRI; Annex B lists the individuals consulted for the evaluation; Annex C 
presents the detailed theories of change and the assumptions that  underpin it; Annex D 
provides further details  on the surveys; and Annex E explains the econometric  and value for 
money  analysis and results in further detail.  4 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  2. Overview of KTP scheme    
2.1 In this Section, we provide an overview of the KTP scheme . This includes the rationale for the 
scheme , the overarchin g aims and objectives, and the intended outcomes and impacts against 
which the evaluation has assess ed the scheme’s  performance.   
Rationale   
2.2 Transferring skills and knowledge from academia into businesses to drive economic impact 
is inherently difficult.  According to the documentation reviewed for this study, t he challenges 
underpin ning  the rationale for KTPs  include the following3:  
• For the Knowledge Base, academics may have relevant expertise but lack the 
resource/capacity to share this knowledge with businesses without additional support. 
They are also often unaware of the needs of businesses in relation to the expertise that 
they have to offer.  
• From the business perspective, KTPs are designed to support businesses that lack a track 
record in R&D and/o r collaborating with the Knowledge Base.  Collaboration is hindered 
by a lack of awareness of where/how to access expertise and knowledge that could benefit 
them in terms of the development of new products/services or improvements to their 
own processes an d performance. This can be exacerbated by the lack of information or 
certainty about the potential benefits that could be brought about by accessing this 
expertise, resulting in an unwillingness by businesses to cover the full costs of doing so.   
2.3 As a res ult of these information and coordination failures , interactions between the 
Knowledge Base and businesses are sub -optimal, despite academics having relevant 
knowledge and expertise that businesses might benefit from. In addition, there is a further 
ration ale in that better connecting the two parties can lead to the development and 
application of knowledge in industry, which is then disseminated or shared through spillover 
effects, i.e. KTPs have the potential to bring about positive externalities  for third  parties , 
thereby bringing about benefits to  the UK economy more widely . 
2.4 The KTP model assumes that business es recognise there is an opportunity or problem that it 
could address with access to necessary knowledge, skills and expertise.  It is also based on  the 
premise that employing high -calibre graduates to work with a business and the Knowledge 
Base is an effective way of ensuring relevant information and knowledge is transferred 
between the two  and becomes  embedded within the business . 
 
3 These align with the 2008 Solutions for Business Review (BIS)  which  identified two justifications for 
the KTP scheme  based on information and co -ordination failures  5 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Aims and objectives  
2.5 The overarching objective of the KTP scheme is “to help businesses in the UK to innovate 
and grow ”4.   Specifically:   
The KTP scheme aims to deliver UK economic growth through supporting the commercialisation 
of innovation.  The KTP scheme help s UK businesses to innovate and grow, improving their 
competitiveness and productivity by enabling a business to deliver a specific, strategic 
innovation project using new skills and the latest academic thinking.  It does this by linking a 
business with an  academic or research organisation and a graduate in a funded partnership.  
UKRI (2021) KTP Evaluation Brief  
2.6 The scheme ’s underpinning aims and broader strategic goals are outlined below.  
Table 2-1: KTP aims an d strategic goals  
KTP aims  Strategic goals  
•  To facilitate the transfer of knowledge and 
the spread of technical and business skills, 
through innovation projects undertaken 
by high calibre, recently qualified people 
under the joint supervision from the  
business and Knowledge Base . 
•  To provide busines s-based training for 
recently qualified people to enhance their 
business and specialist skills.  
•  To stimulate and enhance business -
relevant training and research undertaken 
by the Knowledge Base.  
•  To increase the extent of interactions of 
business with the  Knowledge Base and 
their awareness about the contribution 
that the Knowledge Base can make to 
business development and growth . •  Innovation: delivering solutions that are 
market leading and creating new 
commercial opportunities.  
•  Impact: demonstrating a significant 
influence on the business ’s financial position 
and embedding new capabilities for future 
innovation.  
•  Challenge: changing business practices, 
translating academic research into 
commercial capability and accelerating the 
career of the graduate.  
•  Cohesiveness: ensuring all the above are 
individually strong, inter -connected and 
demonstrating benefits for all of the 
partners.  
Source: Innovate UK  
Inputs and Activities  
2.7 The scheme  is led and run by Innovate UK. Current funders are UKRI, Invest Northern Ireland, 
Scottish Funding Council, Welsh Government, the Department for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy (BEIS) /now the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology 
(DSIT) , and Department for Environment, Food and Rur al Affairs (Defra). During the period 
under evaluation, separate funding was provided by individual Research Councils as well as 
the Department of Health, and ad hoc funding for specific competitions also came from the 
Nuclear Decommissioning Authority and  RSSB (formerly known as the Rail Safety and 
Standards Board).  The annual budget for the KTP scheme  between 2010 and 2020 ranged 
 
4 UKRI KTP Project Authorisation Form  6 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  from £15m to £35m, which include d grant and non -grant costs but exclude d business 
contributions. Over the 2010 -2020 period, In novate UK typically awarded an average of £80 -
100k per project.  Each one usually last ed for  12 to 36 months.  The grant contribution to 
project costs was paid to the Knowledge Base and predominantly cover ed associate 
employment costs and academic time.  The grant rate was 67% of the project cost for SMEs 
and 50% for large businesses.  The business partner therefore had to contribute financially to 
the project cost, in cash and/or in kind.  
2.8 Each year, the KTP scheme  has and continues to  run a series of fundi ng application windows, 
with grants awarded on a competitive basis.  In addition to general ‘open’ calls for 
applications, the KTP scheme  has delivered a series of thematic calls for applications since 
2016/17. These thematic calls have covered emerging an d enabling technologies, health and 
life sciences, infrastructure systems, and manufacturing and materials themes. In addition, 
further funding has been provided specifically for Management KTPs5.   
2.9 As noted above, a  KTP project is a three -way partnership  between a Knowledge Base partner 
(which could be a UK registered university, college, research and technology organisation, or 
a Catapult), a UK -based business of any size (or a not -for-profit organisation), and an 
individual associate with relevant gradu ate-level education. It provides increased capacity for 
academics to transfer their knowledge and expertise into businesses; it enables businesses to 
bring in new skills and the latest academic thinking to deliver innovation that will improve 
performance; and it develops skills, experience and the earning potential of graduates who 
are the KTP associates.  Each project is intended to be innovative and have a commercial focus, 
supporting businesses  where a KTP can really make a strategic difference.  Each pa rtner in a 
KTP project plays a specific role:   
• The Knowledge Base partner helps to develop the project, submits the application and 
recruits the associate. The KTP grant funding goes directly to the Knowledge Base partner, 
provid ing capacity for the academics to transfer their expertise to businesses  including 
through the recruitment of the associate .  During project delivery, the Knowledge Base 
partner provides academic inputs and supervises the associate (typically devoting half a 
day per week to the project), and receives industry and market knowledge in return.   
• The associate is a suitably qualified UK or overseas graduate who leads the KTP project 
within the business.  They are expected to be recently qualified graduates/post -graduates 
in a relevant subject and with ‘the potential to be a business leader of tomorrow’.  The 
associate is employed by the Knowledge Base but works at the business for the majority 
of the project.  The scheme  also provides two weeks of training for each  associate, as well 
as a dedicated training budget. Projects can employ more than one associate.  
 
5Note: all Management KTP projects were still live by the end of 2020 and therefore were  not in scope 
for the evaluation.  The Africa Agrifood KTP thematic call was also excluded from scope.  7 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  • The business commits match funding to the KTP project , and is usually closely involved in 
the defining the focus and designing the project to address a specif ic challenge and/or 
opportunity within the business.  The business  hosts and support s the associate .   
2.10 The scheme  is managed by Innovate UK on a day -to-day basis. The scheme  employs 
Knowledge Transfer Advisors (KTAs), who work in partnership with  KBs acros s the UK.  KTAs 
help to  generat e demand for KTPs , to form  partnerships, and with  applications. This includes 
an initial ‘diagnostics’ role to ensure that project proposals are appropriate for the scheme  
before an application is submitted.  KTAs visit each project every 3 -4 months to discuss 
progress, and can also provide ongoing business support and coaching/mentoring for the 
associate. Each project also has a Local Management Committee, which acts as a steering 
group and meets every four months to assess p rogress.  Monitoring forms are completed 
every three months by the Knowledge Base partner.  At the end of each project, a final report 
is submitted, which is scored by Innovate UK assessors .  
Intended outcomes and impacts  
2.11 KTPs  are expected to bring about b enefits for all three partners involved, both in terms of 
quantifiable outcomes (such as improved business performance and associates’ earnings) 
and wider  outcomes (such as changes in attitudes, cultures and behaviours).  For example:  
• For businesses, KTPs are expected to support the progression and commercialisation of 
new products/services, and/or support the adoption of new/innovative processes and 
practices within the business.  In turn, this is expected to lead to improved business 
performance.  KTPs ar e also expected to generate changes in business culture, such as 
changed views towards  innovation and engaging with academia , and to strengthen the 
absorptive capacity for other performance -enhancing changes in the future.   
• For associates, KTPs are intend ed to help graduates gain confidence and industry 
experience, and then subsequently enable them to secure employment and to accelerate 
their career progression and earnings potential. KTPs also help them to develop their 
technical and business -related skil ls and capabilities.  
• For the Knowledge Base, KTPs are designed to improve academics’ understanding of 
business -related challenges, thereby enhancing business -related teaching and research.  
KTPs are also intended to help shift attitudes towards business e ngagement, strengthen 
relationships, and help to lever age further  research and commercial funding.  
2.12 There is also scope for spillover effects, through building capabilities of the partners involved 
(e.g. by associates applying skills in other businesses , and students at the Knowledge Base 
partner receiving more business -relevant education) and the spread of knowledge/ideas 
developed by KTPs more broadly.   By generating these direct and indirect outcomes, KTPs 
are designed to benefit the UK economy and contri bute towards strategic priorities linked to 
R&D investment, innovation and competitiveness.   8 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  2.13 Figure 2-1 overleaf presents a logic model for the KTP scheme , which sets out KTP inputs, 
activities and intended outputs, outcomes and impacts.  Annex B presents the u nderpinning 
theories of change and detailed assumptions and factors that might enable/help impacts to 
be realised or hinder progress/cause the theori es of change  to break down .    9 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 2-1: KTP Logic Model  
 
Source:  SQW  
10 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  3. Overview of KTP projects  
3.1 This section provides an overview of the KTP scheme  during the evaluation period, which is 
from the start of 2010 to the end of 2020. It explores inputs at the scheme -level and details 
activities funded  covering  the projects and partners involved . Projects in scope include  only  
those that were approved and then closed within the study period , and does not include those  
that were still active after 2020. This is based on analysis of monitoring data provid ed by 
UKRI, our surveys, the  Beauhurst  database  and the ONS Social Research Service .  
3.2 There are two categories of KTP projects within the study  period : 
• First,  there were  projects that  closed after completion  (i.e. F1 status and W3) and had 
submitted a proj ect closure report6. We refer to these projects as being ‘complete’  (i.e. 
beneficiaries)  in the paragraphs that follow.   
• Second,  there were projects  that  started but closed  with no final report being submitted 
(i.e. W4) or projects that were  approved that were  withdrawn entirely /did not start  
(W2)7. These are referred to as ‘incomplete’ (i.e. non -beneficiaries) .  Common reasons for 
this include d businesses  withdrawing from  the KTP because the project was no longer a 
priority (noting that deve loping a project idea pre -award can take a number of months, 
and then associate recruitment post -award can take up to nine months, over which time 
business priorities and external contexts can change) and the failure to find an 
appropriate associate at the  outset or to replace associates that le ft during project 
delivery.  This attrition is a recognised feature of the KTP scheme, and so the management 
team account for it  in award decisions .  It is also worth noting that some  applicants with  
withdrawn KTPs have submit ted subsequent re -shaped proposals which were 
successfully taken forward.  
Scheme -level inputs  
Funding  
3.3 Between 2010 and 2020 the KTP scheme  approved £280m grant funding8 for a total of 2,774 
projects. A total of 2,154 projects were complete d during this period , and these were 
allocated 78% of all grant funding  approved , to the value of  £219m.  The annual budget for 
projects completed ranged from £17m to £42m. The remaining £61m, or 22%, of  all grant 
funding approved was allocated to p rojects that were incomplete ( 620  projects ), of which we  
 
6 F1 projects are those that started and formally ended) and W3 are those that  closed within at least 
four months of proposed end date,  but still ‘finished’ w ith a final report . 
7 W2 projects are  those that had applications approved but the project was withdrawn , and W4 are 
those that started but finished more than four months prior to the proposed end date, and did not 
submit a final report.  
8 This includes both the  value of grants plus an additional +11% for each project that was allocated to 
the KB for wider costs.  11 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  estimate only £4 .2m was spent9. This means the actual amount of grant spent by the 
scheme  between 2010 to 2020  was £223m , in nominal prices10. 
3.4 Figure 3-1 below shows a breakdown of grants allocated, sorted by project  start year. This 
does not account for those  that were funded during the study period  but still active  after 2020,  
so the amount of funding from 2018 onwards appears to tail off.  
Figure 3-1: KTP scheme  grant allocation , per start year for complete and incomplete 
projects  (2010 -2020)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of UKRI KTP projects data for 2010 - 2020, completed projects includes F1 and W3 status only and 
incomplete includes W2 and W4 projects  
3.5 There were 25 different sponsors of completed projects , with the majority of projects 
having either one (50%) or two (45%) sponsors, and a minority (5%) having three.  Innovate 
UK w as the most common s ponsor, contributing grants to 93% of all beneficiary projects, at 
a value of £149.2m.  The next most common were EPSRC (15% and £14.7m) and the Scottish 
Funding Council (11% and £10.9m).  
Total scheme  value  
3.6 To calculate the total value of the scheme , busin ess contributions must be factored in . As set 
out in Section 2, the match funding intervention rate is determined by business size, status 
and in some cases location.  
3.7 When  combining grant  funding and business  contributions , the total spend of complete 
projects was £340m . The total value of incomplete  projects  was £98m , and we estimate 
approximately £7m of this  was spent  by projects that were started but finished very early (i.e. 
 
9 Based on the assumption that 100% of W2 project costs were not spent, and on average only 25% of 
W4 project costs were spent , not including the additional 11% grant for KBs.  
10 i.e. not adjusted for inflation . 
£42m
£17m £18m£28m£29m £29m
£23m£21m
£9m £1m£626k
£325k£136k£269k £347k£488k
£345k
£651k
£939k
£124k
£0£6.8m
£3.0m£3.1m£4.4m£5.2m £5.4m
£4.0m£6.9m
£12.0m
£6.0m
£0£10£20£30£40£50
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Grant value
Millions
Project start year
Complete projects Incomplete (total spent) Incomplete (total unspent)12 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  W4) . This means  the total  value of the  scheme  from 2010 to 2020 was £347m, of which  
64% was grant funding (£223m) and 36% was business  contributions  (£124m) , in 
nominal prices . The chart below presents the amount of funding spent by the projects , sorted 
by start year  and split by complete and incompl ete projects.  
Figure 3-2: Total scheme  spend , per start  year  for complete and incomplete projects  
(2010 -2020)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of UKRI KTP projects data for 2010 - 2020, completed projects includes F1 and W3 status only and 
incomplete includes W2 and W4 projects  
Project characteristics  
3.8 Figure 3-3 presents the start year of the projects from 2010 to 2020, split by status . Of the 
2,154 projects that were completed (i.e. F1 and W3), the majority started before 2015.  
There was a noticeably high number of c ompleted projects that started in 2010, and a ‘steady 
state’ period between 2013 and 2015 of around 300 project starts per year (following two 
lower years). From 2016, the number of completed projects that started in those years fell, 
corresponding with a rise in projects that were still active after 2020, i.e. insufficient time had 
lapsed for them to have reached ‘finished’ status.  
3.9 The annual intake of projects that were withdrawn or finished very early has consistently 
been around 10 to 15% of all approv ed projects, apart from a slight peak in 2018 (24% of all).  
£66m
£29m £28m£44m£46m£45m
£36m
£32m
£14m£1.7m
£0£963k
£494k
£203k£433k £548k£757k
£536k
£1.0m
£1.4m
£186k
£0£10£20£30£40£50£60£70
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Total spend Millions
Project start year
Complete projects Incomplete projects£67m 
£28m 
£28m £44m £46m £45m 
£36m 
£33m 
£16m 
£2m Total spend per year  13 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 3-3: Total number of projects that started each year (2010 – 2020) split by 
status  
 
Source: SQW analysis of UKRI KTP projects data for 2010 - 2020 , completed projects includes F1 and W3 status only  
3.10 The mean duration of completed projects was around two and half years . There was 
some variance within this, with those that finished early closing on average six months earlier 
than those that did not.  
3.11 The mean grant size for completed projects was £91k, with the smallest grant for a project 
being £13k and largest being £328k.  The average size of grant allocated to completed projects 
increased  over the evaluation period , from £86k in 2010 to £ 119k in 2019. This is 
demonstrated in Figure 3-4. 
Figure 3-4: Average grant allocated to completed projects annually  (2010 -2019)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of UKRI KTP projects data for 2010 - 2020, completed projects includes F1 and W3 status only  
0100200300400500
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020N of projects 
Project start yearN of completed projects
N of incomplete projects
N of projects that were started but still active by 2020, and therefore out of scope for evaluation
£86£83£85£92£87£91£101£106£115£119
£0£25£50£75£100£125
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Average grant
Thousands
Project start year14 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Partners involved  
3.12 There  were  1,868  unique businesses  involved in at least one completed project . Of the 
businesses that  completed projects, 88% completed one, and the remaining 12% completed 
between two and four .  
3.13 There were  136  unique KB organisations engaged  in complete projects . Figure 3-5 shows 
that the  majority  had multiple KTP projects,  with the  most common  range being  between  two 
to five  projects .  
Figure 3-5: Range  of completed projects each  KB organisation was involved in  (2010 -
2020)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of UKRI  KTP projects data  for 2010 – 2020 , completed projects includes F1 and W3 status only  
3.14 We estimate that  there was a total of 2,246  associates employed  in completed  projects  
during  the evaluation period11. The majority of completed  projects employed  just one 
associate  throughout , but a small  proportion  (4%) had  multiple ( up to four ).  
3.15 There were  also 48 Knowledge Transfer Advisors (KTAs) involved in completed 
project s. On average , a single KTA was  involved in 45 different completed projects  over the 
study period . Figure 3-6 presents the total number  of projects  individual KTAs were involved 
in, which  ranged from  between 2 and 113. The distribution  is skewed towards the upper and 
lower ends of the spectrum . 
 
11 This is based on the MI data’s profile figure,  which presented a ratio of number of associates: length  
of project. Where projects were given  multiple  profile ratios , we used the largest number of 
associates given  across all ratios.  
12%
1626%
35
13%
18
10%
1412%
1612%
16
9%
127%
9
010203040
1 2 to 5 6 to 10 11 to 15 16 to 20 21 to 30 31 to 40 41 or
moreN of KBs
N of completed projects15 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 3-6: Range  of completed projects KTA ’s were involved in  (2010 -2020)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of KTP MI data, completed projects includes F1 and W3 status only  
Partner characteristics  
3.16 This section focuses on the characteristics and activities of completed projects only.  
Businesses  
3.17 Across all 1 ,868 businesses with completed projects, 15% were micro, 36% were small, 
24% were medium and 25% large12.  Small businesses were most likely to have completed 
one project over the evaluation period (36%), whilst medium and large businesses were more 
likely to be involved in several projects (over 50% of the businesses  that completed 3 or 4 
projects were large or medium sized).  According to ONS So cial Research Service ( SRS) data , 
beneficiary businesses were most commonly in sectors of Manufacturing ( 37%), Professional  
and Scientific (20%), Information  and Communication (12%)  and Wholesale  and Retail (9%). 
The remaining 22% were spread across  several  other industry groups .  
3.18 We have also used the  Beauhurst database to assess whether KTP  businesses  are classified as 
‘high growth firms’ and therefore  tracked in the database13.  Overall, 16% of KTP -supported 
businesses met Beauhurst’s  ‘high growth’  criteria  (299  businesses ), typically  because they 
were  ‘a 10% scale -up’  (69% of those tracked), received equity funding (57%) and/ or feature 
 
12 Business’ size groupings are defined by number of employees, with microenterprises having 1 to 9 
employees, small having 10 to 49, medium having 20 to 249 and large having 250 or more.  
13 Beauhurst  classifies  businesse s as ‘high growth  firms’  if they meet one or more of the following 
triggers: receiv ing equity investment or venture debt, receiv ing a large innovation grant, attend ing an 
accelerator, undergoi ng an MBO/MBI, reach ing scale-up status, being an academic spin out or 
featuring  on a selected high -growth list.  
19%
919%
9
8%
46%
38%
4
4%
28%
4
4%
28%
415%
7
0246810
2 to 10 11 to
2021 to
3031 to
4041 to
5051 to
6061 to
7071 to
8081 to
9091 or
moreN of of KTAs
N of completed projects16 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  on a high growth list (46%).  The Beauhurst data suggests a  small proportion of businesses 
were university spin o uts ( 13%, 39 businesses ).  Of these, one third were spun -out from their 
KTP KB  partner (note, we do not know if these were linked in any way to the KTP project).   
Knowledge Base organisations  
3.19 Of the 136 unique Knowledge Base organisations involved in com pleted projects , the greatest 
number  of projects completed was by Queens University of Belfast (98), followed by 
University of Nottingham (70), and the University of Strathclyde (69). KB organisations were 
most commonly higher education institutions (85%) . One -tenth  were research and 
technology organisations (RTOs) or research institutes attached to a University, and 5% were 
further education institutions . Based on the devolved nations and English regions, t he 
greatest proportion of KB or ganisations supporting beneficiary projects were located in 
Scotland (15% of all), followed by the South East (14%) and the North West (9%).  
Associates  
3.20 Of the associates involved in completed projects, almost all were involved in just one project, 
with 19 being involved in two, and one in three. Prior to starting their KTP, 44% of associates 
had level 7 qualifications (i.e. Master’s degrees), 31%  had level 8 qualifications (i.e. PhD) . and 
23% had a level 6 qualification.   
Spatial distribution of projects a nd partners  
3.21 As illustrated in Figure 3-7, the businesses involved in KTP projects were well distributed 
across the UK , with 75% of beneficiary businesses and 68% of the KB partners  being  outside 
of London and the Great er South East.   17 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 3-7: Location of beneficiary businesses  and Knowledge Base organisations by 
region  
 
Source: SQW analysis of IUK monitoring data.  Map produced by SQW 2022. Licence 100030994. Contains OS data © Crown 
copyright [and database right] (2022 ) 
3.22 Nearly three -quarters of partners in projects  were  within 60 miles from one another14.  
A slightly  higher proportion of partners with completed projects (i.e. F1 and W3) tended to 
be more closely located than those with incomplete project, as shown by Figure 3-8. We 
observe that  55% of beneficiaries were  only 30 miles from one another, compared to 44% of 
non-beneficiaries.  To note, during the evaluation period, the scheme recommended that KTP 
partners were no more than 60 miles apart to facilitate weekly meetings15.  This has 
influenced the results we observe here, but this restriction has now been removed.  
 
14 This analysis was completed for only projects where postcode data was available. For relevant 
beneficiaries (i.e. F1 and W3 projects only) 99% of projects had postcode  data (2126 of total sample 
of 2154), and for non -beneficiaries (i.e. W2 only), 98% of projects had postcode data (326 of 332).  
15 If partners were more than 60 miles apart, the scheme allowed fortnightly rather than weekly 
meetings  
18 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 3-8: Driving distance between business and Knowledge Base partners in KTP 
projects (miles)  
 
Source:   SQW analysis of business/academic postcodes, whe re available (n=2 ,126 beneficiary projects and 326 non -beneficiary 
projects)  
32%
14%
9%7%6%
4%27%29%
9%7%12%
8%7%28%
0%10%20%30%40%
0 - 10 11 - 20 21 - 30 31 - 40 41 - 50 51 - 60 61+
Driving distance between business and knowledge base 
partners (miles)Partners with complete projects (99% with postcode data)
Partners with incomplete projects (98% with postcode data)19 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  4. Design  and implementation  
4.1 Section 4 provides feedback on the design and implementation of the KTP scheme.  This 
includes testing the extent to which the challenge s faced by KTP pa rticipants , and their 
motivations align with the rationale and objectives of the scheme, and the strategic fit of the 
KTP scheme more broadly. We also discuss what has worked well (or less well) in terms of 
engagement and delivery. Note that some of the ev idence presented here is based on 
consultations with stakeholders, and so often reflects their view of the situation now, rather 
than their view of the KTP scheme over the 2010 to 2020 period.  
Rationale and motivations  
Prior experience and challenges for businesses  
4.2 Prior to the KTP, the majority of b usinesses  surveyed were already  innovation active and had 
experience of engaging with academics . For example, 81% had invested in R&D activities 
prior to KTP  (70 out of 86). Of those, almost all had engaged in internal R&D (96%) and the 
majority had been involved i n collaborative R&D (CR&D) projects with external partners 
(76%). Nearly two -thirds had previously engaged with academics (64%) through a range of 
mechanisms, typically CR&D projects , industrial placements, the use of facilities , skills  
development and training , and/or student  projects . Furthermore, for the majority of 
businesses, their relationship with the KTP academic partner or the respective KB institution 
was not new: 38% had collab orated  with KTP academic prior to project, and 49% had 
collab orated with the  KB more generally before  the KTP project. Therefore,  across our survey 
sample, participating  businesses  were  not new to this type of activity , which does not align 
with a rationale that  is based on getting businesses  involved in such activity for the first time.  
4.3 Nonetheless, 88% of business respondents had faced challenges that hindered their 
engagement with academics prior to their KTP  (76 out of 86). For these businesses, the 
main issu es appeared to be not knowing about academic experience available (62%, 47 out 
of 76) and/or not knowing how to access academics (58%), and/or a lack of 
resources/capacity within the business, including finance, to engage with academics (54%).   
These find ings are closely aligned with feedback from consultees, where the key perceived 
barrier was businesses’ lack of knowledge of how to access academic expertise. This included The majority of businesses  and academics surveyed were  not new to engaging with 
each other, and most businesses  were  already innovation active , which is not aligned 
with the rationale . Nonetheless, information failures, risk and resource constraints 
continued to hinder business/academic engagement, which does  align closely with 
the rationale for the scheme. The motivations of business, academic and associat e 
partners also aligned with KTP aims.  20 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  not knowing who they should engage with, where relevant capability lies within KBs , and 
“where is the front door”.  A number of consultees stressed this was a particular challenge for 
smaller businesses , that  lack confidence, existing networks and capacity/resource to navigate 
the university system. For example, different  internal consul tees stated  that  “universities are 
so huge they don’t know where to start ”, and that “ sometimes smaller companies are a bit 
worried about how they might be dwarfed ”. By comparison, consultees stated that larger 
corporates are more likely to have pre-establ ished strategic relationships with KBs and “ know 
which universities can do what for them ”. Other barriers preventing  businesses from engaging 
with academics included differences in language meaning that  “businesses can’t see how to 
make the connection to academics ” (internal consultee) , and in ways of working/timescales 
with  “a perception that universities are slow ” (internal consultee) .    
4.4 When asked why KTP grant funding was needed 
to progress the project, the majority of businesses 
referred to resources, specifically de -risking or 
enabling the investment  required for the R&D 
activity (50 out of 86). Stakeholders thought that 
KTPs played a role in de -risking business 
investment in R&D, especially for those who were 
new to this type of activity. As one internal 
consultee stated, the KTP model of academic 
engagement is perhaps lower  risk than other mechanisms (e.g. , contract work) for businesses 
because the ‘project’ is designed in collaboration with the K nowledge Base partner  with  the 
partner equally invested in “making it work”.   
4.5 These findings support the original rationale for K TPs outlined in Section 2 relating to 
information failures , but not that KTPs were designed to support businesses that lack a track 
record in R&D and/or have no history of  collaborating with the Knowledge Base .  Even where 
businesses do have a track record , those information failures and resource constraints were 
still found to be  a key challenge.  
Prior experience and challenges for academics  
4.6 We found a similar picture for academics: the large majority  of the academics surveyed  
had prior experience of working with businesses (95% , 88 out of 93 ). For half of these 
academics, this prior experience was described as ‘extensive’ and for most of the rem ainder 
it was ‘moderate’ . It included CR&D , contract research and training activiti es. Many academics 
already knew the KTP business partner before the project (39% had collaborated previously, 
and 25% knew the business but had not collaborated). Furthermore, the majority of 
academics had direct experience of working in industry  themselve s (65% , 60 out of 93 ). 
They had also engaged in other public funding scheme s before the KTP, notably with Research 
Councils, Innovate UK, European initiatives and other UK public sector grants.     
 We were a young company. Cash 
flow and business turnover was 
unpredictable, so secure funding 
was very valuable at the time   
Beneficiary business survey 
respondent  
21 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  4.7 Despite this, 82% of academics cited challenges that hinder ed their engagement with 
businesses prior to the KTP  (or their first KTP).  However, from the academics’ perspective, 
the issues were as much to do with businesses being unable/unwilling to fund academic 
inputs (54% of those facing challenges, 41 out of 76 ) as the academics lacking resource or 
capacity to engage with business (33%). Academics also found it difficult to find businesses 
to engage with (42%) and/or lacked knowledge of business needs ( 26%). Internal, external 
and KB consultees also consistently  highlighted the lack of capacity as the main issue. This is 
driven, in part, by other competing priorities (both for the individual and institutional) and 
the lack of incentives to engage in this type of activity. Other key barriers for academics cited 
by consultees included the following:  
• a lack understanding of whether academic ideas would have application in industry  
• a lack of contacts with the business base, which was particularly an issue for early -stage 
career academics and/or academics from oversea s 
• a lack of awareness of the potential benefits associated with business collaboration  
• differences in communications, whereby academics struggle to translate their research 
into business terms and relate it to what businesses might need  
• cultural issues, wh ere a minority of stakeholders stated that in some institutions a culture 
still exists whereby  academics “ don’t need to engage with businesses ”. 
4.8 These findings corroborate the rationale outlined above that (i) academics lack the 
resource/capacity to share knowledge with businesses without additional support and (ii) 
are unaware of the needs of businesses in relation to the expertise that they have to offer. The 
findings suggest there are also other more nuanced barriers across the academic base that 
hinder engagement with businesses, including networks, communication and cultural issues.  
Motivations    
4.9 Across all three KTP project partners (i.e. , the businesses, academics and associates), the 
survey findings indicate d that individuals’ motivations for taking part in a KTP aligned closely 
with the original objectives of the scheme. The following points are important : 
• For businesses surveyed  (n=86) , almost all were looking to  embed new knowledge or 
skills (90%) . Other key drivers included the development/commercialisation of new 
products (78%), new or increased capacity to innovate (69%) , improving existing 
products (65%) , or improving business practices  (56% ). Over two-third s also hoped to 
strengthen their relationships with academics (69%). Using KTPs as a mechanism to 
generate IP/patents or raise follow -on private investment was less important to 
businesses.  
• For a cademics  surveyed (n=93), the  main moti vations  were strengthening relationships  
with businesses (77%) , increasing knowledge  about industry challenges (73%) , 22 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  informing research and teaching materials  (73% and 66% respectively) , publications  
(72%) , and leveraging further income  (63%) . Interesting ly, only around half saw KTPs as 
a route to progressing their career (49%).  These findings were aligned with  feedback 
from KB and KTA consultee s, who highlighted similar motivations for academics, with 
references also made to  contribut ing towards the REF i mpact statements and creat ing 
opportunities for student placements. Learning about commercialisation processes and 
developing relationships with industry were also mentioned by consultees as motivators 
but to a lesser extent.  
• For associates surveyed (n=400 ), the large majority were looking to improve their career 
prospects in industry (90%), apply technical/research skills (80%) and develop business -
related skills and capabilities (72%).  KTPs were often seen as an effective bridge between 
academia and indu stry. Whilst still important to some, KTPs were less likely to be 
considered a route to progressing an associate ’s prospects in academia/research (44%).  
This may reflect, in part, the emphasis on the role of KTPs in supporting careers in 
commercial settings.  
4.10 These findings suggest that KTP funding was , overall,  targeted appropriately between 2010 
and 2020 towards businesses/academics/associates whose own goals were well aligned with 
those of the scheme as a whole. This is an important test of the theory of change, to ensure 
the scheme was on the right track and delivering activities as intended to deliver outcomes/  
impacts as intended. The one area for consideration, which we return to again later in the 
report, is the engagement with businesses that are new to collaborating with academia.    
Strategic alignment  
4.11 According to the large majority of KB consultees and most external consultees (specifically 
the academic representative groups), the strategic priorities of K B institutions have 
become more closely aligned with KTPs over the evaluation period and is now 
perceived to be strong .  Fourteen out of the fifteen  KB representatives interviewed said that 
the KTP scheme was well aligned with their institution’s priorities (and one was unsure due 
to their institution’s strategic priorities being under review)16. This was evident across all 
types of institution  consul ted and those with more/less historical engagement with the 
scheme . That said, several consultees perceived alignment to be stronger in institutions with 
 
16 This align s with findings from the academic survey: 67% of respondents said that KTPs aligned to 
their institution’s strategic priorities relating to business engagement and knowledge transfer ‘to a 
large extent’ (62 out of 93) and 22% said they were aligned ‘to some  extent’ (20 out of 93).  The purpose of KTPs aligns well with strategic priorities of KB institu tions, and more 
widely with Government priorities for innovation.  KTPs are viewed as  important in 
the innovation ecosystem and do not appear to duplicate other forms of support.  
However, consultation evidence suggested that  the scheme  could be better  aligned or 
integrated with the wider innovation support landscape in practice.   23 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  a greater focus on knowledge exchange and innovation. With t he growing importance of 
demonstrating imp act (incentivised by the REF and more recently the KEF), consultees have 
observed a shift in emphasis from teaching and/or research towards a more balanced remit 
that includes knowledge exchange (the latter is no longer perceived as a “third arm”) and the 
need to diversify incomes has encouraged a greater interest in business engagement.  KTPs 
were seen as a useful mechanism to do this.       
4.12 The view across internal, external and KB 
consultees was that KTPs do not duplicate other 
forms of support , in part because the scheme is  
long -standing. Consultees said that new 
interventions should be, and have been, designed 
not to overlap with KTPs.  A small number of 
similar schemes were noted by consultees – 
including industry -funded PhDs, iCASE and impact 
accelerator accounts, the Research in Residence 
programme , and Degree Apprenticeships (and 
historically some ERDF schemes). However, KTPs 
were generally considered distinctive in their 
partnership approach, duration and focus compared to these other programmes.  
4.13  KTA consultees broadly agreed that  the KTP scheme  aligns well with the wider offer of 
innovation support in their area.  For e xample, Smart grants, Innovation Vouchers and (in 
Wales only) Smart Partnerships were often cited as relevant feeder programmes into KTPs.  
The scheme  was perceived to be an important element of the innovation ecosystem  and its 
objectives/purpose aligned w ell with broader Government priorities relating to business 
innovation, productivity and growth.  However, many consultees stated that, even though 
the KTP scheme  was well aligned with other innovation support in theory , it was not 
well integrated in pract ice.  This was raised by both internal and external stakeholders, and 
a minority of KB consultees . A number of internal stakeholders stated that the KTP scheme  is 
on the  “periphery ”, not enough people within UKRI’s own Research Councils understand it 
(and therefore do not integrate it effectively with their own portfolio of products), and it is 
seen as “a nice to have, but in no way central and other scheme s are not built around it ”. Internal 
consultees suggested that more information could be shared across  UKRI on KTP activities, 
progress and impacts. External consultees also found integration with KTPs a challenge. For 
example, one consultee stated that “ at the moment, I don’t think we have a well -formed view 
about exactly where you would use a KTP vs a Sm art grant or other support ”. Similarly, other 
internal and external consultees suggested that KTPs could be better aligned with Research 
Council funding and that the support pathway post -KTPs could be clearer.   
4.14 However, it is important to recognise this i s a common issue across innovation scheme s, not 
just for KTPs. As one consultee put it, there is a  “patchwork quilt” of initiatives in place, 
especially in England. A question was also raised about whether other business support 
bodies (national and local)  are incentivised to promote I nnovate UK  schemes and vice versa:  KTP is unique and sits clearly on 
its own. I say this as a former 
company director relying on grant 
funding and be ing acutely aware of 
resources available to a firm. There 
is no replication across the 
government for the KTP scheme  
KB representative consultee  
24 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  “I think the scheme is complementary but the mechanism of selling the schemes could be more 
joined up” (internal consultee) . On the one hand, the KTP scheme is successfully generating 
benefits (as we discuss further below) and so some may question whether integration with 
wider innovation support matters. On the other hand,  some representatives from UKRI were 
thought  not to be fully a ware of when to utilise KTPs . This may mean there are missed 
opportunities to (a) widen the reach of KTPs and (b) ensure KTP partners receive 
complementary support that might help them to maximise impacts further.   We return to this 
point in Section 12.  
Engagement and i mplementation  
Engagement  
4.15 A number of key factors have  encouraged or hindered engagement of KBs with the KTP 
scheme . These are summarised in Table  4-1 and have been informed primarily by stakeholder 
consultee feedback (internal, external and KB representatives). Note, feedback was not 
gathered from  businesses directly on this topic.  Some common themes are evident for both 
academics and businesses  that h inder engagement , including awareness of the scheme, 
capacity to engage  (and perceived or actual administrati ve requirements to set up a project) 
and the influence of criteria on accessibility  (e.g. , disciplines such as humanities for 
academics, or busines ses with less R&D experience). For academics, institutional 
prioritisation and incentives are important. For businesses, the length of time  between 
application and start ing the project  was also raised.  
4.16 A final point on engagement and accessibility relates to equality and diversity. Whilst 
monitoring data is not available for the gender or ethnicity of all participants, the survey 
found that 89% of respondents to the academic survey and 74% of respondents to the 
associate survey were male. Widening the schem e’s reach in this respect may be a point for 
Innovate UK to consider in future.  The ability of  academic s to engage with KTPs  is influenced by: general awareness, 
their capacity  to set up and deliver projects , the capacity of a supporting KTA/TTO 
team , institutional priorities and senior backing; and per ceived relevance of 
subjects/disciplines to KTPs. Cutting across this, engagement typically comes down 
to individuals acting as advocates for KTPs – the presence or absence of these within 
an institution appears to be a critical factor in take -up. For busi nesses, it was 
perceived that facilitated access and support from KTAs/TTOs has enabled 
engagement with the scheme . Lack of awareness and capacity, and project set -up 
timescales were thought to be important barriers.  25 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   Table  4-1: Key factors influencing engagement with KTP scheme  
KB engagement  Business engagement  
• Capacity and time : this was the most commonly cited factor hindering 
academic involvement in KTPs by KB consultees . This related to both 
forming a KTP project and significant time co mmitment needed before 
the project starts (several KB consultees felt that the application process 
is too long, complicated and overly bureaucratic) and then during 
delivery, especially the time need to support the associate. There was 
some concern that th e KTP resources were insufficient to cover the time 
required to implement a KTP effectively in practice.  Small KBs  have 
reportedly found it difficult to engage with KTPs because of a lack of 
capacity or funding (e.g. , HEIF) to support knowledge exchange ac tivities.  
• Government incentives and metrics : the REF, and more recently the 
KEF, requirements to demonstrate impact and the direct link to funding 
mechanisms (and also the Knowledge Exchange Concordat) have been 
important drivers according to KB and intern al consultees, encouraging 
greater interest among KB institutions to increase their knowledge 
exchange activities.  
• Institutional priorities and political drive from within institutions at 
senior level: this provides “a top -down push”, resource and profile for 
departments or KBs to increase KTP numbers, embed KTPs into the 
culture of the institution and put in place appropriate incentives for 
academics to participate in KTPs. This was raised by KB consultees and a 
minority of internal and external consultees .   
• Explicit targets relating to KTPs : KB consultees described how some 
universities have introduced specific aims relating to their engagement 
with the KTP scheme  (and in one case, this is explicitly part of their 
strategy at an institutional level). This has promoted rapid growth in the 
number of KTP projects. For other institutions, the aims associated with 
KTPs are more broadly set to “grow the numbers” or “dive rsify the 
portfolio” into other KB departments. Overall, out of 15  KB consultees , 13 • Awareness of, and access to, the scheme : several internal and external 
consultees noted that the KTN has helped to raise awareness of the 
scheme  through events, direct engagement and via the K TP website. In 
Wales, Innovation Officers on the ground across Wales also help to link 
businesses to the scheme . The longevity and consistency of the KTP brand 
has provided “stability” in what is a complex innovation landscape and 
therefore helped in terms  of engaging businesses in the scheme . However, 
lack of awareness is still a key barrier to businesses engaging with the 
KTP scheme . External stakeholders in particular flagged the need for 
much greater awareness of KTPs.  
• The time between project idea and start:  the perceived long lag time 
between initiating the project idea, developing the proposal, receiving 
approval and then recruiting an associate was commonly highlighted by 
internal, external and KB consultees as a factor that deterred businesses 
from engaging with the scheme . Businesses have plans/roadmaps and 
need solutions as quickly as possible.  
•  Capacity of businesses to engage : notwithstanding the value of 
KTA/TTO support above, internal and external consultees suggested that 
the lack of time  and resources for micro and small businesses  to get 
involved has been a barrier to engagement. KTPs are a significant 
investment for smaller companies, and this can make them unappealing.  
•  IP agreements:  a minority of KB consultees suggested the 
misperceptions about IP agreements can deter businesses. As one 
consultee noted, companies “ are very concerned about paying royalties ”, 
even though the consultee’s institution does not receive royalties from 
the c ompanies.  
•  KTP criteria:  there was a perception amongst a minority of consultees 
(internal and KB representatives) that the threshold of ‘innovativeness’ of 
KTP projects is getting higher, i.e. , to meet the KTP criteria projects were 26 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  KB engagement  Business engagement  
stated that the KB institution has the ambition to grow their number of 
KTPs.   
• The KB’s specialist expertise in relevant subjects : internal and KB 
consultees suggested th at subjects which were seen to lend themselves to 
KTPs, such as engineering, tend to drive KTPs. Some disciplines, such as 
humanities, have found it harder to engage with KTPs because of 
difficulties in translating their skills to the business world and ma king 
them relevant to potential partners. There was also a concern that the 
KTP application process and criteria favoured commercial and economic 
outcomes/RoI, which made it difficult for socially/environmentally 
focused proposals or those related to intan gibles to succeed.  
• The interest/experience of individual academics in KTPs:  linked to 
the point above, engagement with KTPs appears to be strongly dependent 
on the interest  and prior involvement of specific individuals. As one KB 
consultee stated, “ as acad emics get promotions and take on a different role, 
their involvement with KTPs often falls off.  If they move to different 
institutions, they usually take their KTPs with them ”.  
• Dedicated capacity and responsibility for the KTP scheme  within the 
instituti on: there is evidence from internal and KB consultees to suggest 
that “ strategic investment in the KTP manager ” (alongside clear target 
setting, as noted above) can enable “transformational” growth in KTP 
projects.  
• The longevity and consistency of the KTP  scheme : as one consultee 
stated, the KTP scheme  is seen as a “ safe model ” for academics to engage 
with businesses.  That said, a number of KB/internal consultees also felt 
that more awareness raising is needed amongst academics. KTPs were 
described by two consultees (one KB and one internal) as “ the best kept 
secret ”. expected to be highly innovative. Consultees had also observed a shift to a 
more research definition of innovation, rather than focusing on projects 
which “may not be the very latest academic thinking” but deliver good 
products that are innovative to the business . This generate d a perceived 
concern that this made KTPs less accessible for some businesses, and 
potentially could deter those who had not engaged with KBs before. This 
aligns with findings from the beneficiary business survey, where the large 
majority of respondents  were already innovation active prior to their 
KTP.  
 
Source: SQW synthesis of consultee feedback27 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Project initiation  
4.17 One of the wider research questions for this evaluation was around who instigates KTPs.  
According to businesses surveyed , the business  play s an important role in initiating KTPs : 
53% of projects covered by survey were initiated by business, and 21% were j oint initiation .  
This was corroborated by the academic survey, where 31% said their KTP project(s) was 
initiated by the business and 30% said it was a joint initiative. In both surveys, very few 
respondents said the KTP was initiated by the KTA or someone  else from the KB institution 
(e.g. , TTO). Consultees were more likely to believe that the academic/KB partner initiated  
KTPs  but agreed that initiation by KTAs/TTOs was less common . Consultees also concurred  
that KTPs were  typically based on existing cont acts or relationships between academics and 
businesses (as discussed earlier in this section).  
 Satisfaction with KTP processes and implementation  
4.18 As part of the beneficiary surveys, we asked businesses, academics and associates to rate their 
satisfaction with KTP processes and implementation (where relevant to each respective 
group) o n a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 was very unsatisfied and 5 was very satisfied. Table 4-2 
presents the results, grouping processes/implementation into categories, based on the 
proportion of respondents scoring each one hig hly (i.e. , 4 or 5 out of 5).  As illustrated below, 
overall levels of satisfaction with KTP processes w ere high , especially in terms of 
partnership formation, application/approval processes, monitoring requirements and 
support from the KTA. There was more mixed feedback on associate recruitment processes 
and marketing/promotion of the scheme, which aligns with qualitative evidence from 
consultees.  Satisfaction with KTP implementation was also very high , notably in terms of 
partner commitment and shared visi on, project planning and management, the value of 
academic inputs, associate capabilities and academic/business support for the associate.  
Further details on satisfaction scores are provided in Annex D-1. Survey feedback suggests that KTP projects were typically initiated by  businesses , or 
jointly by multiple partners , counter to the previously  held perception that the KB 
initiates.   
Overall levels of satisfaction with KTP processes and project implementation were 
high, especially in terms of partnership formation  and developing a shared vision , 
application/approval processes, project management and monitoring requirements , 
and support provided by  the KTA . Two areas that received more mixed feedback 
were the associate recruitment processes and marketing/promotion o f the scheme . 28 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table 4-2: Beneficiary survey : feedback on KTP processes  and implementation : 
satis faction rated on a scale of 1 -5 (where 1 is very unsatisfied and 5 is very satisfied)  
Level of satisfaction  KTP processes  Source of f eedback  
KTP processes    
>75% of 
respondents scored 
4 or 5 out of 5  Ease of forming the KTP partnership  Academic s, businesses  
Developing the KTP project  Businesses  
Application and approval process  Academics  
Monitoring requirements  Academics  
Support from KTA  Academics, businesses, associates  
Associate recruitment and induction  Associates  
50-75% of 
respondents scored 
4 or 5 out of 5  Associate recruitment process  Academics and businesses  
Interaction with KB during 
development of project  Businesses  
<50% of 
respondents scored 
4 or 5 out of 5  Marketing and promotion of KTPs  
 Academics  
KTP implementation  
>75% of 
respondents scored 
4 or 5 out of 5  Partner commitment to the project  Academics  
Shared vision for project amongst 
partners  Academics, businesses (note, 
associates scored slightly lower)  
Clear IP agreement  Academics, businesses  
Well -structured project plan  Academics  
Value of academic team’s knowledge 
in relation to project  Businesses, associates  
Capabilities of associate  Businesses  
Delivery of activities in line with 
project plan  Businesses (note, associates 
scored slightly lower)  
Support from academic staff from 
the KB organisation  Associates  
Support from the business  Associates  
50-75% of 
respondents scored 
4 or 5 out of 5  Support from non -academic staff at 
KB organisation  Businesses, associates  
Interaction with KB post -award  Businesses, associates  
<50% of 
respondents scored 
4 or 5 out of 5  None   
Source: SQW analysis of beneficiary surveys with businesses, academics and associates  
4.19 The associate survey found that the large majority of respondents did use their KTP training 
budget (91%, 363 out of 400), but they used  typically less than £500.  This was used for a 
variety of purposes, including attending training courses (in management  and technical 29 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  topics) and conferences, and contributing to gaining qualifications. Satisfaction with the 
training received was high17. 
Activity additionality  
4.20 Finally in this section, we explore whether  KTP project activities would have gone ahead in 
the absence of funding, as an indicator of additionality.  Overall, the majorit y of businesses 
and academics said the projects would probably or definitely not have gone ahead 
anyway if a KTP grant had not been available (67% for businesses and 75% for academics).  
This is very similar to evidence from the close out reports, where 65 % of businesses said they 
definitely/probably would not be making similar progress without the KTP (n= 1,947 ). 
4.21 Most of the remainder said the KTP project may have gone ahead, but in almost all cases, the 
activities would have been compromised in some way. F or example, in the business survey 
32% of respondents said the project probably or definitely would have gone ahead anyway 
(27 out of 86). However, these would have differed in terms of scale ( 59% ), timing (52%) or 
nature (41%). Only one respondent out of 86 said the project would have gone ahead anyway 
in exactly the same way.  Feedback from the academic survey corroborated this: where 
academics thought the project would have gone ahead, most said projects would have been 
smaller in scale,  taken longer or been different in nature (notably less focused and limited in 
scope). Businesses appear to be slightly more optimistic about projects going ahead in some 
form without KTP funding than academics.    
Table 4-3: Activity additionality – survey results: in the absence of KTP funding, do 
you think the project would have gone ahead anyway in some form?  
  Businesses  Academics  
 Count  % Count  % 
Yes, definitely would have gone ahead  10 12%  0 0% 
Yes, probably would have gone ahead  17 20%  21 23%  
No, probably would not have gone ahead  40 47%  33 35%  
No, definitely would not have gone ahead  17 20%  37 40%  
Don't know  2 2% 2 2 
N= 86   93  
Source: SQW analysis of survey results  
 
17 When asked to rate training received on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is very unsatisfied  and 5 is very 
satisfied, 83% of respondents rated the training as 4 or 5 out of 5 (n=363) .  KTPs have brought about R&D activities that would not have gone ahead or not in 
the same form without KTP funding, i. e., almost all activities were fully or partially 
additional.  30 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  5. Business -level outcomes and i mpacts  
5.1 In this Section, we present the evidence on the outcomes and impacts for businesses involved 
in KTP projects (i.e., project partners ), testing the scheme’s performance against intended 
effects set out in the logic model.  The primary sources of evidence were the beneficiary 
business survey and case studies, which were  triangulated with feedback from the 
stakeholder consultations and analysis of data from  close  out reports . 
5.2 The beneficiary survey  was completed by 86 businesses18. These businesses had been 
involved in 104 KTP projects and these projects had received £9.5m in grant funding in total.  
The sample was representative of the KTP population, for example in terms of the average 
grant award  (£92k), the timing of the KTP, their size, and spatial and sector distribution.   The 
KTP projects covered by the survey were mainly  in advanced manufacturing and materials 
(31%), AI digital and advanced computing (24%) or energy/environmental technologies  
(23%).   
Outcomes and impacts   
5.3 Before we present the findings on outcomes and impacts, there are two important contextual 
points to note . 
5.4 First, as noted in Sect ion 4,  the majority of businesses were innovation active and had 
experience of engaging with academia prior  to their KTP.   The majority also had prior 
experience of engaging in other public funding initiatives relating to innovation and R&D  
(69%), notably with Innovate UK, other Government or European schemes, or universities .  
This is likely to influence their capacity/capability t o generate innovation outcomes from the 
KTP project; the large majority were not new to this type of activity.   
 
18 With 86 respondents out of 1,868 unique benefici aries margins of error are ±10 % at the 95% 
confidence level. I.e., if half of the survey reports an outcome, we can be 95% confident that between 
40% and 60% of the overall population achieved that outcome. The margin of error is the largest if 
the survey response to a question is 50%. For example, If 90% report an outcome the margin is ±6%.  There was strong and consistently positive evidence to suggest that KTPs have led to 
both process and product innovation across the majority of businesses involved  (or 
will do so) .  KTPs were often strategically important to the business and f ormed part 
of wider growth agendas and business development activities .  The large majority  of 
survey respondents had observed , or expected to see in the future , an impact on at 
least one aspect of financial performance ( productivity, profitability, employment 
and/or turnover ). KTPs also have a longer -term legacy effect in terms of influencing 
perceptions of , and capability to undertake , innovation and engage with  academi a. 
Many of the relationships with academic/KB partners have continued since the 
project ended.  31 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  5.5 Second, KTPs w ere often strategically important to the business and formed part of wider 
growth agendas and business development activities. For example, when asked on a scale of 
1 to 5 how strategically important the KTP project(s) was to their business19, nearly two -
thirds of respondents scored it 4 or 5 out of 5.  This was explored further in the case studies, 
where we found KTPs were often directly linked to a range of planned  business developments. 
These included:  exploring new business models;  expand ing into new markets ; increas ing 
exports ; re-shor ing manufacturing ; develop ing new product offers ; chang ing internal 
approaches (e.g. the use of data or developing next generation machines) ; and/ or enhanc ing 
digitalisation within the business .  KTPs  were found to  support the delivery of these  business 
plans by providing an evidence base to inform decision -making internally, providing 
empirical data that c ould  be shared with customers to demonstrate the performance of new 
products, or supporting R&D t hat enabled businesses  to explore diversification into new 
markets ( whether  this resulted in “new direction”  for the business  or indicated that the se 
markets were not worth pursing).  The contribution of KTPs to business strategies was 
evident in the close  out reports, where many projects were specifically aimed at progressing 
new products that would enable businesses  to become market leaders , have competitive 
products on the market, or enable a new strategic focus (e.g. in digitisation or automation) 
that would facilitate growth.  As set out in the scheme  aims above, KTPs are  intended to help 
a business progress ‘a specific, strategic innovation project’  and these findings suggest it has 
been targeted appropriately in this respect.  This is also important c ontext for the findings on 
business performance below, and the econometric results in Section 9.  
Intermediate outcomes  
5.6 Figure 5-1 presents findings from survey respondents  on the intermediate  outcomes 
observed to date and those expected  in the future.   As illustrated below, KTPs have led to 
both process and  product innovation across the majority of businesses involved  (or 
will do so in the future) .  Linked to this, the scheme has encouraged bu sinesses to invest 
more in R&D.  Outcomes associated with patents, raising follow -on finance and exits/  
company sales, and new start -ups are also evident , albeit less common  – as we might expect 
for these types of outcomes.   
 
19 Where 1 is not at all important and 5 is very important  32 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 5-1: Business beneficiary survey: for each outcome, please can you tell me if 
this is something you have experienced to date, expect in future, or have not/will not 
experience as a result of the KTP? (n=86)  
 
Source: SQW  
5.7 We explore  these outcomes in more detail in the paragraphs that follow:   
• Business practices and processes : around two -thirds of businesses surveyed h ave 
introduced new processes/practices or improved existing ones (65% and 64% 
respectively) .  This included improving and automating design processes, data analytics, 
accelerating manufacturing processes, improved R&D and innovation processes, better 
management processes (e.g. gaining ISO9001 Quality Management Systems), and 
improving their approac h to interacting with universities.  The case study below provides 
an example of a KTP that helped to improve a business ’s internal processes and business 
model, leading to job creation, increased turnover and profitability.    
• Case study  
The KTP involved an academic from the Department of Operations, Systems and 
Management at the University of Portsmouth, an associate, and Entec International 
Limited. Entec is a business  based in the West Midlands which provides procurement and 
logistics solutions within t he global maintenance repair and operational spares supply 
chain for blue chip clients within the fast -moving consumer goods sector. The project was 
delivered between March 2014 and September 2016. At the time, the business  had a 
broader aim to change its business model from a margin to cost of goods sold to a service 
platform fee model and demonstrate the value of this proposition to customers . However , 
the business   lacked the required technical expertise and experience and wanted to 
explore options with a knowledge partner. It was proactive in sourcing support, 
contacting the local business school which introduced them to the KTP scheme.  
The primary aim of the KTP project, as set out in the application form, was “to develop a 
capability to exploit and de monstrate hidden value within an integrated procurement 
process along complex global supply -chains”. The project focused on two key objectives: 
the development of a tool set to capture and describe the full value proposition of the 
Entec service, and the d evelopment of a new inventory profile or service. During the 
33 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  project the business  also ex tended its technical knowledge and capabilities, improved 
internal processes , and embedded best practice through learning from the knowledge 
base (e.g., interviewing t echniques). Over the longer -term, changes made to Entec’s 
business model through the KTP led to employment benefits, increased turnover and 
profitability, and increased investment readiness. More widely, the KTP raised the 
business ’s awareness of the need to invest in individuals to develop skills, and improved 
perceptions of the value of engaging academic expertise across the business .  The KTP 
helped to strengthen relations with the knowledge base partner, and the relationship has 
been sustained since the  KTP ended (including taking on Masters students).  
The KTP enabled the associate to develop their business and management skills, improve 
their technical and applied research skills, and develop strong networks at the business  
and knowledge base. Since the  KTP, the associate has remained employed by Entec and is 
now Business Intelligence Manager, leading a team of analysts at the business  to deliver 
business analytics, maintaining a relationship with the knowledge base.   
In the absence of the KTP project, consultees said the benefits would not have been 
achieved at all. The business  explained that the project would not have happened without 
the knowledge gained via the knowledge base and the associate, which they would not 
have been able to access without t he KTP scheme. For the associate, the career 
development and progression opportunities would not have happened without the KTP: 
“I have been working for the same company for pretty much nine years now and I would 
not have stayed this long. What I have deve loped during the KTP is I have a sense of 
owning now which made me stay [at the company] for a long time and I am happy”.  
The three -way partnership and regular engagement which facilitated knowledge 
exchange, strong buy -in to the project across the busines s, regular interactions with the 
KTP team, pre -existing relationships between the knowledge base and the associate, and 
proximity between partners were the key factors that helped to deliver a successful KTP.  
 
• Improving existing products/services : over two -thirds of businesses surveyed have 
improved existing products or services (70%) . The case studies provided examples : one 
business  establish ed and embe dded  sophisticated modelling within its data analytics 
team which has improved  the business ’s ability to effectively manage its energy services ; 
another benefited  from improvements to several existing chemical products within its 
portfolio from short projects that the associate undertook  in parallel to the core KTP 
project.  The cas e study box below provides a further example of how the knowledge 
gained via the KTP has enabled a business  to develop new, strategically important 
products.  
• Case study  
The KTP involved a Professor of Pharmaceutical Microbiology at Cardiff University, an 
associate, and GAMA Healthcare (‘GAMA’), a manufacturer and distributor of innovative 
Infection Prevention Control (IPC) solutions such as cleaning and disinfectant wipes and 
other biocidal products based in London. The project was delivered between Februar y 
2016 and April 2019. Prior to this KTP, the Professor and GAMA had worked together 
before, including on two other KTPs which were not directly related to this project.  34 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  The KTP project was prompted by upcoming regulatory changes and improvement on 
effica cy against stringent microorganisms including non -enveloped virus and 
mycobacteria. However, when the KTP started, GAMA’s R&D team had limited experience 
in working with viruses and mycobacteria and in innovative intelligent formulation 
design to enable ne w products to be commercialised at pace.  
The key benefit of the KTP for the business  was the knowledge acquired, and 
development of new core formulations following the biocidal product regulation (BPR) 
that were effective against stringent microorganisms. Following the completion of the 
KTP, the formulations required further refinement be fore commercialisation (e.g. to 
reduce production cost) funded by the business . During the Covid -19 pandemic, demand 
pressures and supply chain issues meant that the business  had to prioritise its products 
for healthcare settings. However, the KTP research  enabled the business  to apply the 
knowledge according to commercial demand and to respond quickly supporting the high 
demand for IPC solutions . More widely the project was considered strategically 
important to the business , to increase the business’s  rese arch knowledge ensuring 
biocidal products delivery and broad -spectrum efficacy. It is also expected to deliver 
wider societal benefits : developing more effective products will contribute to reducing 
the spread of infections in healthcare and other settings . 
The KTP enabled the associate to develop their business and management skills. After the 
KTP, the associate was employed by GAMA and has maintained a relationship with the 
academic.  For the academic, the KTP resulted in internal research publications an d 
helped to maintain a relationship with GAMA (which included a fourth KTP).   
In the absence of the KTP project, consultees said that benefits would have been achieved 
but on a smaller scale and/or they would have taken longer to have been realised. The 
project is likely to have proceeded without KTP funding, but in a different form (e.g. a 
PhD or via testing in a university lab led by a technician/research assistant/associate). 
The KTP offered a “natural route” to undertake more applied research, access t o leading 
academic expertise for the business , and provide the opportunity to deliver a more in -
depth project.    
The quality of the associate, the level of engagement by the business , the experience and 
commitment of the KTP advisor, and regular and frequ ent communication between the 
partnership, were the key factors that helped to deliver a successful KTP.   
 
  
• Technological progression and c ommercialisation : the KTP had enabled over half of 
respondents to progress  new products/services to market (57%, 4 9).  Of these, the 
majority of respondents said that  at least some products/services were new to market 
(63%) with most of the remainder  new to the business (33%). The survey findings 
suggest ed KTPs are a useful mechanism to support R&D across the Technolo gy Readiness 
Level (TRL) scale, as around half new products/services were at the stage of ‘formulating 
and developing the concept for innovations ’ when the project began (49%, 24 out of 49).  
Of those, three quarters now have their product/service in the m arket place .  Figure 5-2 
shows the TRL when the KTP started (A) and at the time of the survey (B).  As illustrated 
below, nearly three -fifths  of all businesses stating that the KTP enabled technology 
progression (59%, 22 out of 39 who were able to comment ) have now reached 
commercialisation and/or are looking to scale -up or have reached  maturity in market . 35 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 5-2: Beneficiary business survey: technology readiness leve l prior to KTP (‘A’)  
and now (‘B’)  (n=39)  
 
Source: SQW  
• Increased investment in R&D : just over half of survey respondents had increased their 
investment in R&D due to the KTP (53%, 46)20.  We asked businesses to quantify this, but 
only 29 out of 46 were able to do so.  This amounted to an additional £13.5m  investment 
in R&D since the KTP project that was attributed to KTPs  (excluding KTP match funding) , 
which represented 14% of total R&D expe nditure across those businesses .  This was 
equivalent to £467k per business that  observed the outcome and could  quantify  the effect . 
Stakeholder consultees also provided a small number of examples from their knowledge 
of the scheme  where KTPs have helped businesses to apply for other innovation funding 
and/or helped to make the case internally for more investment in R&D.  
• Patents and IP :  whilst fewer businesses have applied for or secured patents as a result 
of the KTP (17%, 15), this still amounted to 64 patents secured  across the sample.  
• Raising finance and exits :  KTPs appear ed to have less impact on a business’ ability to 
raise fin ance (14% achieved to date , 12) or enabling an exit or company sale (10% , 9).  
These outcomes were not generally expected to arise from KTPs.   That said, where KTPs 
had an impact on a business’ ability to raise finance, half of those businesses had raised 
private sector investment  already (6).  Four of those businesses were able to quantify and 
attribute to KTP, and this amounted to £5.5m in total ( around  £1.4m per business ).  In 
 
20 This is slightly higher than the proportion that had or planned to invest in R&D in the close out data  
(67% , n=1,979 ), although that may have included some optimism bias at the point of project closure.   
36 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  terms of exits, we found KTPs had enabled businesses  to strengthen their IP ca pability, 
financials and efficiencies, which in turn had led to trade sales/acquisitions.  More 
generally, two -fifths of businesses surveyed thought that  their (self -reported) valuation 
had or will increase as result of the KTP.  
• New start -up/spin off  busin esses :  Only a minority of KTPs had led to start -ups/spin 
outs (seven of the businesses surveyed  had created spin -outs ). This has resulted in  new 
businesses that employ  31 full-time equivalent staff across the sample .  The case studies 
provided an example of this, where a Belfast -based television production company 
established a spinout business in VR services and content production during the KTP 
project (this was one of the original aims of the project) and one of th e associates became 
the Product Lead at the spinout.  Since the project ended, the spinout has increased staff 
from five to just over 20, secured a further £2 million of funding and is preparing for a 
product launch in the summer of 2023. The spinoff busin ess has been identified by Digital 
Catapult as one of the top 10 start -ups to watch . 
5.8 It is encouraging to see outcomes still being attributed to the KTP, even where the project 
finished a number of years ago , exemplifying the sustainability of outcomes .  These findings 
were corroborated by the associate survey, where associates who were subsequently 
employed by the KTP business partner had also observed these benefits in the business and 
the large majority said the benefits were sustained.  For example, of the 195 associates who 
accepted a job at the KTP business after the project ended:  
• 94% had observed improved technical knowledge and skills within the business, and 96% 
of these associates said the benefits were sustained to the present day (if still emplo yed 
at the business) or at least to the point they left (if now working elsewhere)  
• 78% thought the KTP had improved business capability to introduce other performance 
enhancing practices, and 93% of these associates said the benefit was sustained  
• 77% said the KTP led to an increased willingness to invest in R&D and innovation as a 
business, and 89% of these associates said the benefit was sustained.  
Business performance  
5.9 The survey explored whether KTPs had led to improved productivity, profitability, 
employ ment and/or turnover.  Overall, 83% of respondents stated that  at least one of 
these benefits had happened to date or was expected  in future .   
5.10 As illustrated in Figure 5-3, around half of respondents said their produc tivity and 
profitability had improved due to the KTP (52% and 4 8% respectively)21.  A similar 
proportion had observed an increase in employment (46%) and turnover (45%):  
 
21 Close out data suggests that a substantial proportion of increased profits had or were expected to 
come from new products for new or existing markets, follow ed by new markets for existing products 
and improved efficiency.  Improving the quality of products was not a key route to impact.  37 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  • Where employment was higher due to the KTP , this was relatively small in scale: typic ally 
one to five full -time equivalent positions per business (74% of those reporting an increase 
in employment fell into this category).  These were  high quality and high  value jobs . For 
example,  of all the jobs created in the sample (137), the highest share were in R&D 
positions (43%).  A further 8% were in director/senior official  roles.  The remainder were 
in production, sales and customer service functions . 
• Where businesses said that turnover had increased (45%, 39), the amount of additional 
turnover attributed to KTPs was nearly £62m .  This is equivalent to £1.6m per business  
observing the benefit (or £719k per business  across the whole sample of 86).  Exports 
were a key source of the addition al turnover : 62% of the additional turnover 
attributed to KTPs were  exports (£38.4m).  It is worth noting that the majority of 
businesses surveyed were exporters prior to the KTP (64%).   
Figure 5-3: Business  beneficiary survey: as a result of the KTP project, have there 
been any changes to your business performance to date, or do you expect any changes 
in future? (n=86, except n=76 for change in employment)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of survey results  
5.11 As we discuss further in Section 9, the econometric evidence suggests impacts are observed 
during the KTP project, as well as after completion.  The case studies help ed to illustrate how 
some KTPs have quickly translated into benefits , with examples as follows : 
• One case study involved an engineering consultancy business . The KTP associate was 
highly skilled and generated insight soon after starting the project. The business  was able 
to use this knowledge as part of its offer to customers immediately, contribut ing to the 
business  securing new customers in the UK and abroad. Furthermore, the business  has 
found  that  some potential customers were interested in the business ’s wider investment 
in R&D and innovation , and the KTP has been a useful way to demonstrate this.   
• In another case study, five ‘predictive alarms’ for internal operations were developed 
during the KTP project and were implemented effectively, resulting in an estimated £3 -4 
million saving on pred ictive maintenance in the first -year post -project  (see case study box 
below).  
38 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  • In a third example, the associate encouraged the ambitions of the business  (i.e. 
encouraged the business  to develop new products, rather than improve existing ones). 
During the p roject three new chemical products were developed, alongside wider 
improvements to existing products (outside of the KTP project). These changes combined 
led to a 21% rise in sales of chemical products in the last year of the KTP project.  
• Finally, through the course of one project a cloud -based software solution for managing 
engineering class libraries was developed and was “being sold and turning a profit before 
the KTP project ended”.  
• Case study  
The KTP involved an academic and associate from the Universi ty of Strathclyde, and 
Aggreko, a business  supplying power, temperature control and energy services 
equipment and expertise. It was delivered between April 2017 and March 2020.  
Discussions around a KTP were prompted  in early 2017  by Aggreko, wh ich had an 
established relationship with the academic partner. At the time, the business ’s analytics 
team was just starting to take shape and was  working to understand how data analytics 
and machine learning could be applied by the business . Academic support was neede d to 
enhance the business ’s skillset in data analytics and machine learning, as well as its 
understanding of how to use data to improve business operations. The overarching goal 
of the KTP was to apply machine learning and advanced analytics techniques to Aggreko’s 
data sources in two key areas: modelling the cost of assets across their lifecycle and 
understanding what decisions could be made based on this information, and developing 
predictive models to understand asset conditions.  
The key be nefit for Aggreko during the KTP w as the improvement to internal operations. 
The KTP helped to establish and embed sophisticated modelling within the data team, 
which was not previously used. Five predictive alarms were developed during the 
project, result ing in significant cost savings to the business . Since the project ended, 
Aggreko has built on the KTP’s modelling work to see how they could get more value 
from their data. Aggreko now have 23 predictive alarms.  
Other benefits for the business during the KTP included making multi -million -pound 
savings on predictive maintenance as a result of the first set of predictive alarms, 
increased productivity and improved attitudes towards working with academia. Key 
benefits for the associate included increased tech nical knowledge, particularly their 
understanding of data analytics and machine learning, and improved confidence, such as 
in public speaking. Following the KTP, the associate was offered a position at Aggreko 
and has since been promoted to the position of  Senior Data Analyst. Other longer term 
benefits included ongoing improvements to internal operations and capacity within the 
business, increased savings and profitability, talent attraction and retention due to 
Aggreko’s use of sophisticated technology, a nd further collaboration between the 
business and academic.  
In the absence of the KTP project, the benefits described above would have taken longer 
to realise. The industry partner described the KTP project as an ‘accelerator’ for progress, 
as it enabled A ggreko to bring in skills and expertise needed to apply statistical modelling 
to their data and demonstrate the value of investment in this area.  
Key factors that enabled the success of the project included having high -level project 
objectives which gave the KTP members scope to explore their task in depth, successful 39 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  matching of academic partners to business needs, and close proximity between partners 
which enabled in -person, collaborative and frequent meetings.  
 
5.12 The close  out database provide d further e vidence on the financial impact of KTPs across all 
completed projects.  Whilst  the quantitative data on  turnover  impact etc is not sufficiently 
complete/reliable  to use, the database provide d some information on  how significant the 
results of the KTP were to the business 's performance at the time of project close and in 
future .  As illustrated below , the majority of KTPs were expected to have a ‘high’ significance 
in future.  
Figure 5-4: Close  out data: Overall , how significant do you believe are the results of 
the KTP to the company's present and future performance  
 
Source: SQW analysis of close  out data base  
Wider benefits to business  
5.13 Figure 5-5 captures wider benefits arising from the KTP projects and the extent to which they 
are sustained, based on feedback from the beneficiary survey.  Even though most businesses 
taking part in the survey were already innovation active and had prior experience  of engaging 
with academia, the large majority have improved their perception s of, and capability to , 
undertake  innovation and engage with academia as a result of the KTP.  Moreover,  
KTPs were found to be  having a longstanding legacy effect for most busine sses  in this 
respect , whereby these qualitative benefits have been sustained after the KTP ended.   We 
explore these benefits in more detail in the paragraphs that follow.  31%36%
33%
8%26%66%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%
Low Medium High% of respondents
Company's present performance (n=1689) Company's future performance (n=1872)40 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 5-5: Beneficiary business survey: have you experienced any of the following 
wider benefits from the KTP? (n=86)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of survey results  
Innovation culture and capabilities  
5.14 As illustrated above, 87% of business respondents have improved their technical 
knowledge/skills within the business as a result of the KTP, 79% improved their views 
towards the benefits of R&D activity, and 66% have improved their capability to introduce 
other performance enhancing practices, and almost all have sustained these benefits .  The 
case study box below provides an example of how the KTP has help ed to embed innovation 
within a business  more effectively than consultancy or contract R&D.  These cultural benefits 
were also corroborated by associates who were employed by the KTP bu siness after the 
project ended22.  
 
22 In the  associate survey, 94% of associates who were subsequently employed by the KTP business 
partner (n= 195) agreed KTPs that improved knowledge and skills within the business, 79% said that 
businesses  were capable of introducing other performance enhancing practices, and 77% said 
businesses  were more willing to invest in R&D.  
41 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Case study  
The KTP involved two senior academics in the University of Surrey’s Chemistry 
Department, an associate with a PhD in Chemistry, and Advanced Engineering Ltd, a 
chemical products company in the air conditioning and refrigeration industry that was 
based in B asingstoke, now part of the Aspen Pumps Group. The project was delivered 
between February 2014 and February 2017. At the time, the business  faced several 
market changes, notably increased competition and legislative change driving the need to 
modify produc ts. A lack of internal expertise in chemistry motivated the business  to seek 
external support , leading to a new working relationship with  the academics from Surrey.   
Whilst the original aim of the KTP was to improve existing products, the associate was 
keen to enhance the ambitions of the project. In parallel  to developing three new 
products that were subsequently commercialised , the associate delivered a number of 
shorter projects to improve existing products within the business ’s existing  product 
portfolio. During the project the business  saw process and culture changes, including an 
embedded approach to innovation, which could not have been obtained by consultancy 
or contract R&D. It has successfully completed the implementation of R&D fu nctions to 
support and strengthened its brand in the market. This has successfully boosted the 
business ’s sales, whilst at the same time enabled the business  to establish a network of 
UK/EU customer channels for its innovative products.  The university dre w on the 
knowledge gained through the KTP to introduce formulation chemistry in the university’s 
'Industrial Chemistry' module.  
Over the longer -term, the KTP has contributed to a “new direction” for the business , with 
R&D now considered a core part of its  operation. An R&D department was established 
after the KTP, and the associate was appointed as head of the department. Revenue 
generated from the new and improved products supported the growth of the business , 
and was thought to have contributed to the business ’s buyout by a larger group. The 
products developed during the KTP have continued to generate royalties for the 
University. The relationship between the partners has been sustained, facilitated by the 
associate becoming a Visiting Lecturer at the Uni versity of Surrey. This mutually benefits 
the university and business  by offering industry insights to students and providing the 
business  with continued access to university facilities and staff. The academics continue 
to have a partnership with the busin ess, validating some of their academic research 
through closer working relationships, and enabling the development of better 
understanding of industry.  
Without KTP funding, the project would have likely gone ahead in another form (e.g. a 
PhD project), whic h would have meant a more academic focus. The KTP may have helped 
to facilitate a stronger focus on commercial outcomes. Even though the associate thought 
their career would have progressed without the KTP, it would have perhaps taken 3 -5 
years longer, bec ause the KTP provided a “spotlight” on their work and capabilities. This 
is evident with the prompt certification of the Associate as a Chartered Chemist from the 
Royal Society of Chemistry and a Chartered Scientist from the Science Council.  
Consultees sug gested that the key factors that led to a successful KTP included well -
defined project aims at the outset, a high -calibre associate, additional support from 
Surrey University’s Business School, and strong buy -in to the project across the business . 
A pro -active and neutral KTP Adviser enhanced the impact of the project by helping to 
ensure an effective  use of resources,  and ensuring that the Associate’s agenda s (in project 
implementation and personal development) were protected and amplified.  
 42 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  5.15 The stakeholder consultees observed KTPs leading to increased capabilities and skills within 
the businesses , and noted how cultural shifts were a key outcome fro m KTPs .  For example, 
one KTA stated that KTPs have provided businesses with “ a set of new capabilities that will 
facilitate future growth ”, including knowledge development and collaboration skills.   An 
internal consultee had observed how KTPs prompted businesses to reflect on wider barriers 
to growth and fundamentally changing business practices/models moving forward as an 
indirect result of the KTP experience.   There was also anecdotal evidence from consultees to 
suggest that some businesses  have found the project -based approach to R&D (and associated 
management structures/processes) used in KTPs 
helpful and have since integrated this way of 
working into their day -to-day practices.  
5.16 Whilst the majority of businesses surveyed had 
prior experience of R&D, KTPs were also 
considered to be an effective mechanism to engage 
businesses that have limited R&D experience by 
stakeholders consulted.  Changes in the innovation 
cultures and capabilities were thought to be  most 
prominent for this group of businesses, as 
illustrated by the adjacent quote.  The way in which 
KTPs enabled many businesses who did not have 
prior experience or capacity for R&D to en gage in 
this type of activity was a theme evident in the 
close out reports.  
Engaging with academia  
5.17 The business survey found  79% of respondents placed greater value on academic 
expertise and were now better able to engage with KBs .  Whilst most businesses had 
sustained these benefits, they were slightly less likely to do so than  the innovation outcomes 
above.  The picture was similar for businesses’ relationship with the academic or KB partner 
from the KTP – 80% had strengthened their relationship with the KB partner, but some 
of these were no longer in touch.  This outcome was more likely to occur where the business 
already knew the KB.  
5.18 Where business relationships with academia have 
continued after the KTP, just over half of this group  
said they have a continuous relationship with the 
KB partner from their KTP (56%, 29 out of 52).  
This includes businesses who had not previously 
collaborated with academic/KB, suggesting the 
KTP has enabled them to establish a strong ongoing 
relationship in a short space of time.  A further 13% 
of businesses engage with the KB partner more  KTP in part icular is good at 
drawing in companies that have not 
done R&D in the past. We have a lot 
[for whom] this is their first serious step 
into doing proper R&D. Whether you 
call that innovation diffusion or 
whatever you want to call it we are a 
really important  scheme for drawing 
in SMEs and being the first important 
step on their journey  
KTA Consultee  
 [The KTP project] has given us the 
confidence and knowledge to 
navigate the academic and 
institutional sector more coherently 
for our gain   
Beneficiary bu siness survey 
respondent  
43 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  than once a year.  Ongoing relationships have involved collaborative R&D projects, the use of 
the KB’s equipment or facilities, industrial placements for students, gradu ate recruitment or 
in a skills development/training capacity.  We also found that some businesses have had 
further academic placements in their business (33%) or done a subsequent KTP (25%), 
suggesting they value the embedded nature of academic engagement.   The majority have also 
engaged with other KBs since the KTP (71%, 61) and the nature of this engagement is slightly 
more varied than above and more likely to focus on CR&D or the commissioning of contract 
research.   Businesses noted that, as a result of  the KTP(s), they have a better understanding 
and ability to collaborate with academic, as well as improved relationships with universities.  
A small minority of respondents said the KTP had led to reputational benefits for the business, 
whereby academics are more interested in engaging with the business . 
5.19 These findings were  corroborated by the associate survey, where 74% of associates who were 
subsequently employed by the KTP business partner (n= 195) said that the KTP had 
strengthened relationships with t he KB partner (and 87% of these said the benefit had been 
sustained).  Three -quarters (76%) also thought the KTP had improved the business’ s 
perceptions of the value of academic expertise and their ability to engage with KB 
organisations (and these benefit s had been sustained).   
Other benefits and disbenefits  
5.20 More broadly, businesses have found KTPs a 
useful mechanism for recruitment  after the 
project has ended .  The process of engaging with 
the associate has been particularly useful, 
enabling businesses to employ graduates on a 
trial basis and, in many cases, then recruit them .  
For some, this was an unexpected benefit of KTPs.  
One respondent also suggested the KTP has 
helped to professionalise  the business 
particularly in terms of recruitment.  Stakeholder 
consultees also noted how KTPs can be an 
effective way for the business to recruit 
individuals with the necessary skills and a good 
understanding of the business , and typically a 
“good fit".   
5.21 Finally, another benefit noted by a KB stakeholder consultee highlighted the cultural impact 
associates can have on the businesses  involved in the KTP project:  
“I think that there have been cultural benefits of the scheme, I guess this is kind of for the 
companies, but we find that a lot of our associates are international students or PhD graduates. 
[…] The company will find that they are getting different perspectives – that is a really good 
benefit which is not expected or captured.  For example, we have  had a company which recruited  From our perspective, internal 
research capacity was limited [before 
the KTP].  Doing the KTP instilled 
confidence and allowed us to 
undertake direct research ourselves 
and have more confidence in 
commissioning from think tanks and 
other entities  
Beneficiary business survey 
respondent  
44 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  an Indian [associate] and they ended up opening a branch in India which is something they had 
not thought about before; she brought a new dimension. A lot of our associates are female as 
well, we find that a lot of engineerin g companies have a male workforce, so it is good there.”  
KB consultee  
5.22 There was limited evidence of spillover effects from this evaluation.  One third of businesses 
responding to the survey said they have shared knowledge gained through KTP with other 
busi nesses (34%, 29), but there was limited evidence from the case studies on this.  We 
explore wider local benefits for place in Section 8.  
5.23 The majority of businesses did not report any adverse consequences of participating 
in the KTP  (71%, 61).  For those th at did, this mainly related to the level of resource required 
to operate the KTP successfully, manage the administrative side of a KTP, and support the 
associate (which, for some, was greater than anticipated).  A minority experienced issues with 
unsuitabl e associates, which absorbed more time than expected and distracted from wider 
business activities. Only two respondents encountered issues related to IP/knowledge 
ownership.   The close out reports pointed to a minority of cases where the KTP did not work 
as planned, notably where academic inputs did not deliver as anticipated, which has led to 
some caution in pursuing this type of activity in future.  
Additionality  and contribution    
5.24 A key aspect of the evaluation was testing the extent to which  the outcomes observed above 
were additional, i.e. would not have been achieved at all, or not as quickly or at the same scale, 
in the absence of the KTP.   
5.25 As shown in Table 5-1, for the majority of businesses surveye d, outcomes were 
considered to be partially additional (65%, 53), i.e . taking part in the KTP has meant that 
outcomes have been accelerated, greater in scale and/or different in nature than would 
otherwise have been the case.  Even though some benefits may  have occurred anyway, the 
results suggest these would have been compromised in some way:  
• Where businesses said outcomes would have taken longer, half said it would have taken 
three years or more.   The case studies suggest that, in these instances, KTPs have helped 
to de -risk investment and ensure that resources were more focused on implementin g and 
embedding learning from KTPs.  In the absence of KTP funding, business outcomes would have taken longer, been 
smaller in scale and/or d ifferent in nature (typically lower quality) or would not 
have been achieved at all.  Deadweight is low.  However, it is important to 
acknowledge that, in the majority of businesses , other influencing factors  (before and 
after the KTP)  played a role  in achieving outcomes .  The KTP was often one part of 
the story and its relative importance varied  across businesses .  45 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  • Where businesses said outcomes would have been smaller in scale, the large majority 
(65%) said benefits would have been halved or less . 
• Where businesses said outcomes would have been different in nature,  this generally 
meant lower in quality, e.g. the research would have been ‘less accurate’ with ‘more 
mistakes’, or their understanding/knowledge would have been reduced.   
5.26 Nearly a third of businesses said outcomes would not have occurred at all without the 
KTP  (30%, 25), which represents full additionality. We explored the reasons for this further 
in the case studies, and found this was mainly because businesses  lacked the relevant 
skills/expertise and would not have taken the risk in what was perceived to be ‘experimental ’ 
research.  Interestingly, some  case study businesses  said consultancy could have provided a 
short term solution to the challenges faced, but sustained benefits would not have occurred.    
5.27 The level of deadweight was very low : only 5% of respondents said t hey would have 
achieved the same outcomes anyway, even if they had not done the KTP.  
Table 5-1: Beneficiary business survey: would the benefits described above have been 
achieved anyway in the absence of the KTP project(s)? (n=82)  
  Count  % 
Full additionality: Would not have occurred at all  25 30%  
Partial additionality:  53 65%  
Would have occurred but later  26 32%  
Would have occurred but at a smaller scale  24 29%  
Would have occurred but different in nature or quality  24 29%  
Deadweight: All the benefits would have occurred at the same scale, 
speed and quality  4 5% 
Source: SQW  analysis of survey results .  Note, partial additional categories were not mutually exclusive.  
5.28 To test the role of KTPs in generating benefits further, beneficiary survey respondents were 
asked about other factors that may have contributed to the outcomes discussed in above and 
the relative importance of the KTP project(s).  
5.29 The large  majority busin esses identi fied  other influencing factors that played a role  
(95%, 82), while four did not know . Most  had undertaken further innovation and R&D since 
the KTP (71%), in part following on from the KTP but also reflecting the fact that  most were 
innovation active businesses  already.   Businesses also indicated  that earlier R&D activities 
prior to the KTP play ed a role (59%), alongside wider investment activities by the business 
(reinforcing the earlier point that KTPs were often part of a wider investment strategy, 48%) 
and wider business support/advice (38%).  Wider economic drivers we re also noted by over 
half of respondents (56%).  
5.30 Despite the wider factors outlined above, around half  of businesses surveyed stated that 
the KTP project played  an important contributory factor alongside others  (52%) in 
achieving benefits .  In the case studies, subsequent R&D act ivities (that were either directly 46 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  or indirectly related to the KTP project) , alongside enthusiasm and willingness to invest from 
business leaders  and sufficient capacity to implement changes (e.g. new processes) , appeared 
to be the most important other fa ctors.  
5.31 For the rem ainder  of survey respondents , views were more polarised: a third said that the 
KTP contributed but was less important than other factors , highlighting wider business 
development activities taking place alongside the KTP and external driv ers; whereas for a 
minority, the KTP was the key driver of change , with 11% stating that KTP was the most 
critical factor.  For the latter, businesses in the case studies described how KTPs were a critical 
in their product development ‘journey’, and the te chnical skills of the associate w ere 
particularly important to success.  
Table 5-2: Beneficiary business survey: what has been the relative importance of the 
KTP(s) in achieving the benefits compared to these other enabling factors?  (n=83)   
  Count  % 
The KTP was critical relative to other factors  9 11%  
The KTP was important and contributed alongside other factors  43 52%  
The KTP contributed to outcomes but was less important relative to 
other factors  27 33%  
Don't know  4 5% 
Source: SQW  analysis of survey results , n=83 as 3 did not provide a response to this question.  
 47 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  6. Associate outcomes and impacts  
6.1 In this Section, we present the evidence on the outcomes and impacts for associates involved 
in KTP projects, assessing these in relation to those  expected as per  the logic model. The 
primary source of evidence for this section was the associate survey, which has been 
triangulated with feedback from  stakeholder consultations, case studies and monitoring  data.  
6.2 The associate survey was completed by 400 associates.23 These associates had been involved 
in 405  KTP projects and these projects had received £ 39m of grant funding in total. The 
sample was rep resentative of the KTP population in terms of the timing of the KTP  and project 
status . At the time of the survey, t he highest proportion  of associates  covered by the survey  
were aged between 35 -44 (54% , 215 ) and 25-34 (35% , 141 ), and the majority of respo ndents 
were male (74%, 297 ).  
Outcomes and impacts   
6.3 More widely, t here are two important contextual points to highlight with regard to the 
associates surveyed before we present the findings on outcomes and impacts:  
• First,  the majority of associates surveyed (75% , 299 ) had a Masters or PhD prior  to 
their KTP (those with a PhD were  typically 1 year post award  (65% , 80) ) and some had 
academic or industry work experience (44% , 175 ). In addition, just under half of 
associates had engaged with the KB partner prior to KTP (45% , 181 ), mainly as a student 
(81% , 146 ) or as an employee (28% , 50 ). These prior experiences will have likely 
positively influenced capabilities with regard to generating outputs for both the other 
project partners and their own personal development through the KTP project.   
• Second, when asked why they were motivated to take part in the KTP project(s), 
motivations aligned with purpose of KTPs , specifically to improve industry career 
prospects (90% , 359 ), apply technical and research skills (80% , 318 ), and develop 
 
23 With 400 respondents out of 2,295 beneficiaries , margins of error are ±4% at the 95% confidence 
level  if the survey response to a question is 50%. If 90% report an outcome the margin is ± 3%. Overall, there was strong evidence that KTPs have led to both benefits for capabilities 
and/or skills and career progression across the majority of associates involved (or 
will do so). Specifically, the large majority of survey respondents had observed an 
impact on their business skills (including innovation and commercialisation and 
wider project management) and/or an impact on their research and technical skills. 
KTPs  had also positive ly affect ed associates’ career ambitions, employment 
opportunities and earnings. Benefits were sustained after the KTP project ended and 
knowledge  had been  disseminated more widely, with examples from both industry 
and academia.   48 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  business -related skills and capabilities (72% , 289 ). More widely, almost  half were 
motivated to improve their career prospects in academia/research (44% , 174 ).  
Intermediate outcomes  
6.4 Figure 6-1 presents findings on the outcomes observed to date by survey resp ondents, plus 
those who have not experienced benefits to date but expect them to occur in future, based on 
the intended intermediate outcomes listed in the logic model. The outcomes can broadly be 
grouped into two key themes, namely that  KTPs have (or will  have ) led to benefits for 
capabilities and/or skills and that  they have led to  career progression  across the 
majority of associates involved .24 More widely, albeit less common, the scheme has 
encouraged some  associates to create or be involved in new business start -up(s).   
Figure 6-1: Associate survey: for each outcome, please can you tell me if thi s is 
something you have experienced to date, expect in future, or have not/will not 
experience as a result of the KTP? (n=400)  
 
Source: SQW  analysis of survey results  
6.5 These o utcomes are discussed in more detail in the paragraphs that follow:  
• Improved bu siness skills : around four -fifths  of the associates surveyed cited that the 
KTP had allowed them to improve  their  skills/capabilities in wider business processes , 
e.g., enhanced project and business management skills, awareness of how businesses 
operate,  and improved professional and interpersonal skills  (82%, 329 ), as illustrated in 
the case study box below . In addition, over three -quarters  of respondents reported having 
improved skills/capabilities in business innovation and commercialisation processes a s a 
result of the KTP ( 77%, 308 ), particularly in terms of how that fits within the business and 
the skills needed to do it.  This align ed with st akeholder consultation feedback which 
consistently indicated  that KTPs have led to improvements in associates’ capabilities in 
terms of innovation processes, commercialisation and exploitation, and managerial skills. 
 
24 This aligns with feedback from the close out  database, where  associates were asked as to what level 
they felt the KTP experience has helped their professional development, with around three quarters  
stating  it had a high level of impact (77%, 1,646 ). 
49 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  This was reportedly achieved through the project (practical experience and exposure to 
senior management), associated training and mentoring from the KTA, and through 
gaining “exposure to customers, employers and stakeholders” . More widely, almost all 
associates reported having improved their knowledge about industry challenges as a 
result of the KTP ( 97%, 387 ), likely linked to wider exposure to busine ss processes 
throughout the project .  
• Case study  
The KTP project involved an academic based at Edinburgh Napier University, an associate 
who was undertaking a postgraduate degree in software engineering (at Edinburgh 
Napier), a second associate who joined from China, and an Edinburgh -based industry 
partn er, The Environment Exchange (t2e). t2e provides an online marketplace that 
allows buyers and sellers of Packaging Recovery Notes (PRNs) to trade throughout the 
United Kingdom. The project began in May 2010 and completed just under two years 
later in Decem ber 2012.  
In early 2010, t2e was seeking to redevelop its underpinning IT infrastructure (a web -
based trading platform), which had been in place since 1998 and was no longer fit for 
purpose. Alongside this, the business  was exploring an avenue of business  diversification 
into the market for recovered paper. t2e therefore sought to bring in an associate through 
the KTP to develop a new trading platform which could also support business 
diversification into the market for recovered paper. The KTP allow ed this software 
development to be carried out in house and develop internal capabilities, rather than 
outsourcing the work.  
The associate successfully developed the new platform, which was launched in the 
market shortly after the end of the KTP (at which po int the associate was a permanent 
member of staff). The development of new internal systems, which  helped to develop 
internal skills and capabilities and  could support the business’s progress towards 
diversification, was a clear benefit for t2e. The entry into the market for recovered paper 
did not succeed and so there were no lasting benefits in this respect. Despite this, the 
platform has “stood the test of time” and, at the time of the study, continued to support 
t2e’s principal workstream in the PRN mar ket, demonstrating the long term nature of the 
benefits arising from this KTP. In the absence of the KTP, the business  would have looked 
for other options to develop the software, such as outsourcing to a software developer or 
recruit ing. However, this wou ld have taken longer and/or been more costly as well as 
potentially less successful.  
The associate benefited from participation in the KTP. Notably, they gained “hands on 
industry experience” and improved skills, including communication skills and managin g 
ambiguity. The associate’s experience of the KTP made their CV “stand out” and gave 
them more talking points in interviews, which led to accelerated career progression, 
when the associate left t2e.  Without the KTP, the associate would have progressed in  
their career, albeit more slowly and possibly would not have reached such a senior 
position as they are in now.  
The key enabling factor in achieving these benefits, highlighted by both consultees, was 
the complete integration of the associate into the business . The associate noted that they 
“felt just like an employee of the firm” and was based in the business ’s office full -time. 
This was key to understanding how the business operated and therefore how the 50 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  platform needed to function, and also to giving t he associate the hands -on experience 
which was so valuable to their career progression.  
• Improved applied research and technical 
skills:  in line with the aims of the scheme , the 
evidence indicates that  KTPs have had a 
positive impact on associates’ technical and/  
or research skills ( 93%, 373 ). This is reflected 
in over half of associates surveyed report ing 
that they  have gained qualifications as a result 
of the KTP project (54%, 216). A range of 
qualifications were identified by consultees, 
most commonly covering technical skills, e.g. 
engineering or software coding, or project 
management skills, including PRINCE2 or 
Charte red Management Institute 
qualifications (c.40% each)25. Other specific 
qualifications  identified by individuals 
included  masters level qualifications . The case 
studies provided further examples of the 
types of technical skills improved through 
KTPs, includ ing software, data analytics, 
machine learning and web development skills.  
• Raised career ambitions and progression:  
as we discuss further in the following sub -
section, the survey evidence indicate d that 
KTPs ha d a positive impact on associates’ 
career ambitions (78% , 312)  and accelerated 
their progression within industry (65% , 260). 
The case studies  provided an example of this, 
where the KTP experience meant the 
associate’s CV “stood out”,  leading to an 
acceleration in their career which after 10 
years was “only just  starting to fade now”.  More widely, career progression was not limited 
to within industry, with almost a third of associates surveyed reporting that the KTPs had 
accelerated their career progression within academia/research (31%, 122).   
• New start -up/spin off businesses:  a smaller proportion reported that KTPs had led to 
them creating or being involved in the creation of new business start -up(s) . This was 
 
25 The close out  database provides additional detail on qualificatio ns gained by associates through the 
KTP, overall, it indicates that  around a quarter  of associates registered as a candidate for the Diploma 
(Level 5) in Management through the KTP (24% %, 516 ).  
 I covered every role required 
for a software project – leading it, 
reporting on it, ensuring it was 
progressing on time, developing the 
software itself, and managing t he 
budget    
Case study consultee – associate  
 
 Learning how your research fits 
into the wider business and societal 
challenge, and how you translate it 
into a proper commercial venture  
Associate survey respondent  
 The biggest is accelerating career 
development […] plus the experience 
of leading a strategically important 
project in the business working with 
CEOs […] it is not an opportunity that 
many recent graduates would get   
KTA Consultee  
51 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  reported by  almost a fifth of survey respondents (19%, 77) and represented  136 new 
businesses in total. Of these respondents, the majority stated that the business (or 
businesses) were still active (88%, 68) and predominantly small enterprises (<50 
employees). Reflecting on whether they would have set up the business start -up(s)  if they 
had not taken part in the KTP, associate  feedback suggest ed that  these effects  were  fully 
or partially additional (44% and 45% respectively). An example of an associate setting up 
their own business  using the skills and experience gained through t he KTP is provided 
below  (with the associate then drawing on the KTP and business experience in a 
university teaching role) .  The case studies  also  provided an example of how KTP 
experience ha d helped the incubation of a business  more widely . In one case, a KTP 
associate ha d since moved KB institution and become Head of Innovation within their new 
institution. In their new role they have established the business incubation programme  to 
support spinouts, noting that the KTP project ha d played an important ro le in this: “I have 
an academic background and I have a view of how business works [via the KTP]”.      
Case study  
Commencing in 2010, the KTP involved two academics at the University of the West of 
Scotland (UWS), an associate who had recently completed a BSc in Marketing at UWS, and 
Orb Group International, a promotional merchandise distributor based in Glasgow. The 
KTP sought to create an e -commerce strategy for Orb, which had previously focused on 
acquiring clients through its sales team and had limited expertise relating to e -commerce.  
The KTP initially involved an assessment of existing customer satisfaction and an 
‘environment scanning’ exercise to understand market opportunities and potential 
competitors. Informed by these activities, Orb began develo ping digital solutions (i.e. 
online stores for consumers, B2B merchandise ordering) for potential customers. This 
coincided with a promotional showcase, which was led by the KTP associate, to engage 
with potential customer businesses. By the end of the KTP , the business  had developed a 
range of digital solutions for its customers.  
Following the KTP, the associate continued to work as a Marketing Manager at Orb for 
another two years, before establishing their own marketing consultancy business  while 
undertak ing a post -graduate qualification at UWS. The associate then went on to 
undertake a PhD closely related to the KTP. Orb has continued to develop digital 
solutions, which have now become a core part of its current business.  
The KTP led to a number of benef its. The business  expanded its clientele through a new 
service offer, leading to significant business  growth, to a point where it has sold the 
sports merchandising arm of the business. Orb has maintained relationships with large 
customers and been able to increase its level of repeat custom, as its digital solutions 
have become embedded within the client’s processes, while word -of-mouth 
recommendations have led to acquisition of new customers.  
 
 
For the associate, the KTP enabled ‘fast tracked’ career prog ression. The skills developed 
through the KTP were critical to establishing their own consultancy business , and the 52 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  clients they worked with during the KTP provided credibility and a strong professional 
network for developing the business. The associate is  currently working on a PhD related 
to the KTP alongside their role as a Senior Marketing Lecturer at UWS and Head of the 
business school’s Marketing, Events and Tourism unit. The associate includes digital skills 
gained via the KTP (such as SEO and web de velopment) within their teaching material in 
an effort to improve employability of UWS’s marketing students.  
The success of the KTP has contributed to UWS’s reputation as an industry -engaged 
university.  KTPs are central to UWS’s industry engagement strate gy, and in 2022, the 
UWS KTP Centre won the award for Knowledge Exchange at the CeeD Industry Awards. 
This KTP was used as a model case for the value of management KTPs.  
A well -engaged industry partner who is willing to invest in the KTP, and associated 
activities, was critical to the success of this KTP. The flexibility of the KTP was also 
helpful, as the activities undertaken during the KTP were not fully foreseen at its outset.  
 
Career path and earnings  
6.6 Figure 6-2 captures the career path for associates post -KTP completion, based on feedback 
from the associate survey. Overall,  the vast majority of associates surveyed have 
progressed in their careers in industry or academia . We explore these benefits in more 
detail in the points that follow.  
Figure 6-2: Associate survey: career path after KTP completion  
 
Source: SQW  analysis of survey results .  Note: * 1 did not respond; ** 5 did not respond; *** the remainder were employed in 
research organisations, public sector or charities  
6.7 Post -KTP, the majority of associates surveyed were offered a job at the KTP business (62%, 
246), with most of these accepting the offer (79%, 195). The case studies provided exam ples 
of the types of roles associates have gone on to secure at the KTP business, many of which 
were senior positions, for example Senior Data Analyst, Product Lead, Business Intelligence 
Manager, and Head of R&D. Of those who did not accept the job offer or were not offered a job 
53 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  at the KTP business, the majority were in employment immediately after the KTP project 
finished (90% , 45 for those not accepting the job at the business;  and 82% , 123  for those not 
offered a job at the KTP business ), predominantly in roles in industry or at a knowledge base  
organisation .  
6.8 Of those who accepted a  job at the KTP business  but have now left  (58%, 114) , 
associates generally stayed for up to four  year s, with  around a quarter staying for up to 
two years (28% , 32) and a third staying for two -four years ( 35%, 40). It is important to n ote 
that these figures partly reflect  the amount of  time that has passed in some cases since the 
KTP  completed.  The case studies p rovide example s of this : in one  an associate continued  
working at the KTP business for two years post -KTP, before setting up their own business  
utilising the skills and networks that they had  gained ; in another case the associate had to 
relocate and theref ore sought new employment after one and a half years working for the KTP 
business . 
6.9 With regard to current position s across the 400 
associate respondents, a fifth remain ed 
employed by the KTP business (20%) and 
almost one -half were employed elsewhere in 
industry (47%) . Nearly one -fifth  work ed in 
academia (17%), some were in  other employment 
(including s elf-employment (14 %)) and a small 
minority were  not in employment ( i.e., 
unemployed or studying) (3%). Detail on a ssociates’ current roles within industry and 
academia is as follows:  
• Industry : associates work ed for businesses  across a mixture of different sectors, most 
commonly manufacturing (31%, 84), services (26%, 69), information and communication 
(11%, 29) and professional and scientific (10%, 27). All consultees were in professional 
roles, with those most frequently iden tified including  senior roles (e.g. manager, director 
or senior official; 26%, 81) , R&D management  roles (18%, 56) or in an R&D p rofessional 
occupation (21%, 63).  
• Academia : associates currently employed in academia work ed in a wide  range of roles, 
most co mmonly lecturer (26%, 17), senior lecturer (15%, 10) or research fellow (12%, 
8). 
6.10 The impact on associates’ careers not only related to their progression, but also to their salary 
level, with  two -fifths of consultees reporting that their salary was higher now because 
of the KTP project (40%, 152). Whilst it is difficult for associates to quantify the precise 
effect, o f those who said their salary was  higher, almost a third  said it was currently  £10k -
£19.9k higher than it would be if they had not undertaken the KTP (30%, 46), while just over 
a fifth said it was £5k -£9.9k higher (21%, 32).    We see a lot of them retained 
and see them take up a reasonably 
senior role. Lead roles and working on 
sustainability and innovation  
KTA Consultee  
54 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 6-3: Associate survey: Impacts on current salaries due to KTP  
 
Source: SQW  analysis of survey results  
6.11 Those  associates surveyed who now work in academia noted a range of benefits for 
their academic/research career . These includ ed improved capacity for business 
engagement (76%, 71), more industry -relevant research (65%, 61) , and more industry -
relevant  teaching materials (53%, 50). The KTP was also noted to have benefits for funding 
secured since the project, with around a quarter having leveraged further public or charitable 
research funding and/or leveraged further commercial fun ding (28% , 26 and 24%, 23 
respectively), with the total amount attributable to the KTP being £2.2m (n=14) and £1.1m 
(n=8) respectively. These benefits were explored further in the case studies. For example, one 
associate noted that as a result of the digit al skills gained during the KTP they ensure d digital 
skills (such as web development) were included in teaching materials and  sought  to teach 
industry relevant skills to improve the employability of students. Another associate has 
continued to be involved in KTPs as an academic partner, as they “had such a positive 
experience”,  they were “keen to promote the scheme  to students and support the knowledge 
transfer process”.   
Sustained benefits and disbenefits  
6.12 More broadly, case studies provided examples of how benefits for associates have been 
sustained since the KTP project completed. As would be expected, for those who were offered 
employment after the KTP, a sustained benefit has been continued employment at the 
business  or, for those who have left, continued engagement with the business . Similarly, 
several  associates who were consulted as part of the  case stud ies reported continued 
relationship with the academic.  
6.13 More widely, other benefits to associates that were  identi fied in the case studies include d 
continued involvement in KTPs as an academic partner, income from royalties associated 
with the IP generated during the project , and influenced from the KTP on further 
postgraduate qualifications  (e.g. on Masters or PhD ac tivities ).  
55 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  6.14 It is important to note that just over a quarter of associates surveyed  indicated they had 
experienced adverse effects as a consequence of participating in the KTP (27%, 107). Key 
themes identified amongst these respondents included poor workin g conditions in the 
business leading to high pressure, stress, bullying and in a minority of cases leaving the 
project (17%); a lack of engagement between partners limited potential learning 
opportunities (7%, reinforcing the earlier point that KTPs requir e a whole team approach and 
commitment at the outset); and finally the business closed meaning the KTP stopped and 
employment ended at short notice (4%).  
Knowledge s pillovers  
6.15 There was evidence to suggest that KTPs have had  a spillover effect  through the wider 
transfer of knowledge by associates . Overall, the majority of associates currently working 
in industry but not at the KTP business said that they ha d shared the skills and 
knowledge gained as a result of the KTP with other businesses they have worked  for 
since the KTP ended  (85%, 178). The benefits of this  for those businesses  particularly 
focused on improving existing processes and practices in the business  and introducing new 
processes and practices in the business (84% and 80%  of associates reporting these effects  
respectively), with others noted including progressing new products/services to market 
(57%, 102) and increased investment in R&D (42%, 75). An example from one case study 
illustrate d this point with an associate having  trained new staff within the business .  
6.16 More widely, of the 400 associates surveyed, two fifths have shared the skills and knowledge 
gained as a result of the KTP with other busine sses they have not directly worked for since 
the KTP ended, e.g., through collaborative relationships or dissemination of best practice. 
Again, this was reported to have resulted in improvements to existing processes and practices 
within the se third -party  business es (72%, 12), improve ments in  existing products/services 
(67%),  and the introduc tion of  new processes and practices in the business (62%).  We note 
that we have not been able to verify these effects.  
6.17 The case study box below provides an example of h ow knowledge and experience gained by 
a KTP associate has been beneficial in their current role at a research organisation, informing 
their advisory work with a range of other businesses in the region and nationally.  The case 
study also shows the value of the networks gained through KTPs for all three parties.  
 56 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Case study  
This project involved Rotary Engineering, a small Sheffield -based engineering business  
specialising in the design and manufacture of equipment for use in coil manufacturing, 
electric motor  repair and industrial electromagnets, an academic from Sheffield Hallam 
University (SHU) specialising in art and design, and an associate who had recently 
completed a PhD at SHU before the KTP commenced.  The KTP project developed a novel 
method to manufa cture high value, patterned metal laminate material using friction -stir 
welding, notably for use in the decorative metals industry. The ultimate aim was to 
commercially exploit the material as a new revenue stream for the business.  The project 
was deliver ed between December 2014 and December 2015.  
Rotary and SHU had worked together prior to this KTP (including through KTPs on 
different topics) and already had a strong relationship. Rotary lacked the expertise, 
capacity and resources internally to invest in  the novel and uncertain manufacturing 
process required to meet commercial aims, and the KTP enabled them to have a 
dedicated associate with expertise in friction -stir welding.   
The project was delivered as planned.  The business ’s experience in innovatio n, alongside 
its prior experience of working with SHU (and other universities), helped to underpin the 
success of the KTP project.  Other factors that were key to successful delivery included: 
having a dedicated person to explore the new market opportunity  (especially as a small 
business ); the way in which the associate provided an access point for the business  to tap 
into the university’s wider network of expertise, and then crucially, apply this directly to 
the business ’s needs; the KTP structure (with cl ear milestones and KPIs); buy -in within 
the business and support to the associate; and the proximity between partners to 
facilitate regular face -to-face communication.   
In the year after the KTP ended, Rotary and SHU secured follow -on European funding to 
progress the manufacturing process further and then set up a spin out company to 
commercialise the material. The associate was recruited to take forward the spin out, 
Rotary continued to invest and the academic remained involved. Unfortunately, due to 
tech nical challenges in manufacturing at scale, the lack of an established market for the 
niche product, and challenges in securing external private investment, the spin out 
recently ceased trading.   
Nonetheless, the KTP still delivered benefits for those involved. It helped to strengthen 
Rotary’s relationship with SHU and the “knowledge network” across the city region more 
broadly (for example, if Rotary cannot meet a customer’s needs, they are now be tter able 
to signpost to other experts at SHU). It has helped to strengthen the business ’s reputation 
and knowledge in innovative and “forward thinking” ventures, which is useful when 
looking to recruit or engage with potential new customers (including in international 
markets). The associate valued the experience of working in a small business , gaining 
exposure to commercialisation and business processes alongside progressing technical 
R&D.  The associate now works at the Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre on the 
Advanced Manufacturing Park in the Sheffield City Region, and is benefiting from the 
local networks established and the knowledge and hands -on experience gained through 
the KTP in this new role . For example,  they have b een able to use their skills in  how to 
engage with businesses and understand their needs, and  have drawn on their knowledge  
in the design of degree apprenticeships.    
 
 
 57 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  6.18 Finally, t he case studies provide d evidence of how learning from the KTP has spilled  over into 
academia:  
• KTP associates returning to their KB institution  had deliver ed presentations about their 
experience.  
• One associate became a visiting lecturer at a university  on the ‘Industrial Chemistry’ 
module. The module did not previously include any lectures from industry, so the 
academic thought it would be advantageous for students to hear about the “real li fe” 
application of chemistry. The role was reported to be  advantageous for the business  too 
because they have continued access to university  facilities and staff.   
Additionality  and contribution    
6.19 The associates surveyed were asked to reflect on  the extent to which the career  outcomes 
observed above were additional, i.e., would not have been achieved at all, or not as quickly or 
at the same scale, in the absence of the KTP.  
6.20 As shown in Table 6-1, the majority of associates surveyed considered outcomes to be 
partially additional (66%, 263), i.e., taking part in the KTP has meant that outcomes have 
been accelerated, greater in scale and/or different in nature than would otherwis e have been 
the case. Even though some benefits may have occurred anyway, the results suggest these 
would have been compromised in some way:  
• Where associates said outcomes would have taken longer, 51% said it would have taken 
one to three years longer  and 29% said it would have taken three to five  years  longer . As 
an example, one case study remarked that the KTP provided a “spotlight” on the 
associate’s work which accelerated their career progressio n, while another felt they might 
have “got stuck” at a lower grade without the KTP project.  
• Where associates said outcomes would have been smaller in scale, the largest proportion 
(42%) said benefits would have been half as big or less . 
• Where associates sa id outcomes would have been different in nature and quality, this 
generally focused on the different career paths they would have taken, e.g. they would 
have worked in a different sector or profession entirely, and they would have reduced  
industry experien ce and therefore fewer opportunities in their career, with resultant 
implications for job quality, status and salary . In the absence of KTP funding, associate  outcomes would have taken longer, been 
smaller in scale and/or different in nature (typically lower quality) or would not 
have been achieved at all.  Deadweight was low.  However, as with the business 
findings it is important to acknowledge that, for the majority of associates , other 
influencing factors (before and after the KTP) played a role in achieving outcomes.   58 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  6.21 Nearly a fifth of associates said outcomes would not have occurred at all without the KTP 
(17%, 67), i.e., full additionality. This was explored further in the case studies, with associates 
reasoning that they felt it was unlikely at that point in their ca reer t hat they would  have got 
the same experience / development opportunity via another means. Meanwhile, the level of 
deadweight was low, only 13% of respondents said they would have achieved outcomes 
anyway if they had not done the KTP.  
Table 6-1: Associate survey: would the benefits to your career described above have 
been achieved anyway in the absence of the KTP project(s)? (n=397)   
Count  % 
Full additionality: Would not have occurred at all  67 17%  
Partial additionality:  263  66%  
Would have occurred but would have taken longer  170  43%  
Would have occurred but at a smaller scale  64 16%  
Would have occurred but different in nature or quality  83 21%  
Deadweight: All the benefits would have occurred at the same scale, 
speed and quality  50 13%  
Don’t know  17 4% 
Source: SQW, n=397 as 3 did not identify any benefits so were routed to skip this question. Note, partial additional categories were 
not mutually exclusive.  
6.22 To test the role of KTPs in  generating benefits further, associate survey respondents were 
asked about other factors that may have contributed to the career outcomes discussed above 
and the relative importance of the KTP project(s).  
6.23 The  vast  majority of associates identified other influencing factors that played a role in 
achieving the benefits  (97%, 384 of 397 ). The large majority o f associates noted that the 
employment positions they held following the KTP  (74%), and qualifications and trai ning 
undertaken following the KTP (47%) , had played a role in achieving the career benefits , which 
likely reflect ed the time that ha d passed since the KTP projects. Associates also felt that their 
experience prior to the KTP, including  qualifications and t raining undertaken (71%) and 
employment positions  (44%)  played an important role. This was confirmed via feedback from  
case studies, where associates’ education qualifications and previous employment 
positions/roles were cited as important in enabling bene fits. Wider economic drivers were 
also noted by two fifths of survey  respondents (4 4%), while careers advice received and 
support from elsewhere were noted by 43% and 37% respectively.  
6.24 In addition, beyond those listed above, associates identified a range of personal factors which 
had played a role in them achieving the benefits, with key examples including advice and 
encouragement received from other individuals (inc luding  family and friends, KTA s, support 
staff at the knowledge base and wider academics), personal drive and ambitions, and 
involvement in third party organisations (e. g. Institute of Mechanical Engineers and research 
groups at universities).  59 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  6.25 Reflecting these other influencing factors (Table 6-2), the majority of associates surveyed 
stated that the KTP project was an important contributory factor alongside others (55%) in 
achieving benefits. For the remainder, around a quarter said that the KTP contributed to 
outcomes but was less important relati ve to other factors, and nearly one-fifth said the KTP 
was the most critical factor.  
Table 6-2: Associate survey: what has been the relative importance of the KTP(s) in 
achieving the benefits compared to these other enabling factors? (n=39 3)  
Count  % 
The KTP was critical relative to other factors  104  26%  
The KTP was important and contributed alongside  other factors  217  55% 
The KTP contributed to outcomes but was less important relative to other 
factors  65 17% 
Don't know  7 2% 
Source: SQW , n=393 as 4 did not provide a response and 3 did not identify any benefits so were routed to skip this question.  60 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  7. Knowledge base outcomes and impacts    
7.1 In this Section, we present the evidence on the outcomes and impacts for academics involved 
in KTP projects (i.e. , project partners) and the wider KB organisations involved in the scheme.  
The primary sources of evidence were the beneficiary academic survey and case studies, and 
in-depth stakeholder interviews (including representatives from 15 KB organisations).   
7.2 The academic survey was completed by 93 academic project partners.26  These academics had 
been involved in 138 KTP projects and these projects had received £ 13.2  m in grant funding 
in total. The sample was representative of the KTP population, for example in terms of the 
average grant award (£ 92k), the timing and duration of the KTP, their size and spatial 
distribution, and the number of KTP projects academics had participated in. The survey also 
included academics from a range of different types of KB institution.       
7.3 As outlined in Section 4, most academics surveyed wer e not new to working with businesses.   
The majority of academics surveyed had prior experience of working with businesses as an 
academic, including the KTP business partner, and/or had worked in industry themselves.  It 
is important to bear this in mind w hen considering the findings below.  
Outcomes and impacts – for KB project partners   
7.4 As illustrated in  Figure 7-1, the key benefits for academics taking part in KTPs appear to be 
three -fold: first, a large majority of academics surveyed had improved their knowledge of 
industry challenges,  with a feedback loop to their academic work through more industry -
relevant rese arch and teaching materials and (to a lesser extent) academic publications and 
further funding levered; second, most have improved their outward -facing knowledge 
transfer abilities  and were more able to work  with businesses; and third, academics have 
stren gthened relationships with businesses  involved in their KTP projects. KTPs as a route 
to career progression seem to be less prominent for academics than associates, as might be 
 
26 With 93 respondents out of 1209 academics in our population  margins of error are ±10% at the 
95% confidence level  if the survey response to a question is 50%. If 90% report an outcome the 
margin is ± 6%. Key benefits for academics taking part in KTPs include d improved knowledge of 
industry challenges, leading to  more industry -relevant research and teaching 
materials , academic publications , and the leverage of  further  funding .  Academics 
were better equipped to engage with businesses  and have strengthened relationships 
with businesses involved in their KTP projects.  KTPs have also helped  to progress 
academic career s. Benefits were sustained after the KTP project end ed and 
disseminated more widely , leading to potential spillover effects .   61 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  expected, but was still important  for some . A smaller proportion of academics h ave generated 
IP and/or spinout business from the KTP , which was an unexpected effect of the scheme.   
Figure 7-1: Academic beneficiary survey: for each outcome, please can you tell me if 
this is something you  have experienced to date, expect in future, or have not/will not 
experience as a result of the KTP? (n=93)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of survey results  
7.5 We explore these outcomes in more detail in the paragraphs that follow:  
• Increased knowledge of industry challenges : 92% of academics reported an 
improvement in their knowledge of industry challenges as a result of the KTP. KB 
consultees described how academics benefit ed immediately from entering a “live” 
business setting, engaging with businesses and learning how to successfully apply their 
knowledge. This exposure to industry knowledge, experiences and data has meant these 
benefits are realised quickly.    
• More business -relevant research and teaching: for the majority of academics, their 
KTP has helped to ensure greater industry relevance of their research and teaching (81% 
and 75% respectively) , as illustrated by the case study below .  Several KB and internal 
consultees  observed KTPs opening new areas of research interests for academic project 
partners. As noted by one KB consultee “quite a lot of our academic colleagues report their 
research direction being influenced by the research they are undertaking in KTPs”. Many 
of the consultees from  KB institutions  and external HE representative bodies  also said 
that KTPs have informed teaching and, in doing so, improved the quality of teaching and 
student experiences.  Consultees also cited examples of KTP associates and busine sses 
62 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  delivering guest lectures. There was evidence from the consultations and close  out data 
of student placements and projects created at graduate and post -graduate level to run in 
parallel to KTPs, as well as opportunities created after KTPs had ended du e to 
strengthened relationships with businesses.27 Indirectly, these knock -on benefits should 
help to strengthen the employability of students.  
Case study  
The KTP involved two academics from the Bartlett Schools of Planning and of 
Environment, Energy and R esources at University College London, an associate, and KSBC 
Plc. KSBC is a business that  provid es office relocation consultancy and project 
management advice relating to building service capabilities and technological 
infrastructure, based in London. The  project was delivered between August 2016 and 
January 2019. The academics had been involved in previous KTP projects and understood 
the benefits of the scheme. The project was jointly initiated by the university (knowledge 
base) and the industry partner. There was no previous relationship between the two 
partners, with the business  approaching UCL with an idea leading to a KTP application 
being submitted.  
The rationale for the project was to fill a gap in the commercial property sector to cater 
for increas ing demand for technology for businesses who are considering taking 
occupation of a new office. The overarching goal was “to develop a robust, automated and 
standardised framework for evaluating a building's technological service characteristics 
in terms o f its technological availability, readiness and capacity in support of relocation 
activities.”. Through the project, the associate developed guidance and protocols for on 
the ground assessment, alongside an app for the business  to utilise.  
During the proj ect, the KTP enabled the associate to develop their business, management, 
technical and applied research skills, to raise their career ambitions, and to gain valuable 
experience. The academics reported they received improved knowledge of industry 
challenge s, opportunities and spin -out possibilities.  
The academic and associate were able to take their learning and experience forward. 
Following completion of the KTP, the associate secured a position at University College 
London working on research impact befo re moving to another institution where they are 
now Head of Innovation. In their new role, the associate has established a business 
incubation programme, which supports academics to create business spinouts. The KTP 
experience has informed the academic par tner’s teaching materials and research, which 
are now more industry -relevant (e.g., the academic now runs a module on ‘proptech’, 
using the KTP as a case study), and improved their capacity for business engagement and 
knowledge transfer (e.g., off the back  of the KTP, the knowledge base secured a 
sponsored PhD through the UBEL Doctoral Training Centre).  
 
 
 
 
27 Close out data shows that 3,988 undergraduate research projects, and 3,049 postgraduate research 
projects were established as a result of KTPs.   
 63 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  In the absence of the KTP project, feedback suggests the outcomes described above 
would not have occurred at all. KTP funding was key in enabling the project to go ahead 
and reducing the risk for all parties involved.  For the associate, benefits for them in 
terms of skills development and their career trajectory would not have happened without 
the project.  
Consultees suggested that the project worked well because knowledge, support and 
guidance was shared openly with the associate by the knowledge base, t he associate was 
situated in the business environment, and the three -way partnership facilitated 
knowledge exchange.  
 
• Leverage of further funding: around half of the academics surveyed ha d lever aged 
further commercial funding as a result of the KTP (51%,  47), and a similar proportion ha d 
lever aged further public or charitable research funding (49%, 46).  Across the sample, this 
amounted to £272m in total, of which £83m came from commercial sources and £189m 
from public/charitable sources. One of the case studies demonstrated how an academic is 
still benefiting from royalties associated with the IP generated during the KTP project.   A 
further example is provided in the case study below.  
Case study  
This KTP involved an academic from Ulster University’s School of Computing, an 
associate with a PhD in Computer Science (from Ulster University) and the Verbal Arts 
Centre, or ‘Verbal’, a Derry/Londonderry -based charity. Verbal is the only 
artistic/cultura l organisation of its kind on the island of Ireland, working through 
storytelling and the arts to support positive mental health, resilience and cross -
community dialogue in areas of high -level sectarianism, community conflict, deprivation 
and marginalisati on. The KTP was delivered between February 2018 and October 2020 
and aimed to develop an AI -enabled chatbot tool that would form a key component of the 
charity’s first digital bibliotherapy service.  
All partners were satisfied with how the KTP was deliver ed. Despite disruption during 
Covid -19 and some challenges managing expectations between feasibility of objectives, 
time required for the associate to learn new skills, and developing new processes in the 
charity, the project was delivered to plan. The ass ociate successfully developed the tool, 
which was subsequently released as the ‘WellRead’ service in mid -2020, meaning the 
KTP met its aims. The service received high interest initially, but demand dropped 
relatively quickly, with Verbal stating th at “the focus of the user experience was not quite 
right, with an incorrect emphasis on the child and not the parent, which stalled take off 
[during Covid -19] as we hoped”. However, the tool remained an asset to the charity and 
was re -developed into another servic e that has since been successful.  
 
 
 64 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  A range of benefits were achieved by the partners. The KTP led to Verbal releasing its 
first digital service. The KTP also supported the development of other new digital 
services, by directly providing the foundations for subsequent services, and increasing 
the charity’s confidence in managing and investing in digital capabilities. To continue the 
work of the KTP, Verbal has since recruited two software developers and invested in 
external consultancy support, meaning th e project has led to a sustained uplift in the 
charity’s digital capacity.  
The KTP provided all partners with significant learning and professional development 
opportunities. The associate gained skills and experiences in software engineering, 
project man agement and communication that directly helped them to secure a university 
lectureship role after the KTP. The associate has continued to apply skills gained from the 
KTP in this role, notably in ensuring their research is well -aligned with industry needs.  
The associate has ongoing interests in supporting knowledge transfer in this capacity, 
and is now a KB partner for other KTP projects. Similarly, the academic was able to 
further their research interests and gain valuable insight into the process of apply ing 
innovative academic concepts within industry. As a result of the KTP, three research 
papers were published  between the academic and associate. . The academic also drew on 
the KTP and its outputs in bids for additional funding for progressing research in  this 
field, and has successfully secured four major grants with a combined value of over £7m.  
The academic and charity had previously worked together on an Innovation Voucher 
project, which provided a helpful basis for delivering the KTP. The academic also had 
significant experience delivering KTPs in the past, enabling them to provide high quality 
guidance throughout and support mitigation against risk. This was important due to the 
“exploratory nature” of the KTP, and because this was the fir st R&D project Verbal had 
completed in this field.  
 
• Publications:  62% of academics surveyed stated that the KTP had led to publications, 
and a further 11% expected publications to be generated in future. Across the sample, 
KTPs had led to 173 academic pub lications, with an average of nearly two publications 
per respondent to date. The close  out database supports this finding, and suggest ed it 
could be as high as c. 1,370  papers that had been published/submitted to refereed journals 
across all closed project s, giving an average of 0. 6 per respondent (n=2 ,154), although this 
was at the point of project closure and will not capture publications since then. These 
findings were also  corroborated by consultation evidence, where the role of KTPs in 
increasing the n umber of high quality academic outputs and publications was cited as one 
of the key benefits arising from the scheme by many of the KB and HE representative 
consultees.     65 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  • Career progression:  almost half of the 
academics surveyed said that the KTP helped 
their career progression (48%, 45).   Academics 
also noted how the KTP had improved their 
professional networks, reputation and 
recognition. The consultations provided further 
insight on the rol e of KTPs in career progression 
within academia. According to several KB and 
KTA consultees, in many cases KTPs can directly 
contribute to promotions and even be set as a 
requirement for promotion, as illustrated in the 
adjacent quote.  In some cases, cons ultees said 
the impact of KTPs on career progression has 
been transformational, although this can depend 
on incentives and performance metrics within 
each institution.   
• Creation of spinouts : the number of academics 
who have created a spinout from the KTP was 
six. Whilst low in absolute terms,  it is 
encouraging to see this type of entrepreneurial 
activity arising from KTPs , which was 
unexpected .  
7.6 There is strong and consistently positive 
evidence to suggest that KTPs have a longer -
term legacy effect for aca demics . Almost all 
academics surveyed said the benefits gained from 
the KTP were sustained after it was completed 
(95%, 88) and three -quarters of those academics continue to reap the benefits now (76%, 
67). The majority of consultees also believed that man y benefits were sustained in the longer 
term, such as accelerating career development, understanding how to engage with 
businesses, and ongoing relationships with businesses (as well as wider institutional -level 
legacy effects, which we discuss further bel ow).      
7.7 There was evidence to suggest that KTPs had led to potential spillover effects.   Most 
academics surveyed had shared the knowledge gained through KTPs with other academics 
(84%) and many had also shared with other businesses (57%).  Mechanisms tha t facilitated 
spillovers were explored further in the case studies. In addition to improving teaching 
materials, creating placement opportunities and publications, as noted above, the knowledge 
gained has been disseminated through conference presentations (including internationally).  
In one case study example, the academic has become a member of the British Standards 
Institution (BSI) and has since informed a number of international standards (and therefore 
is expected to have a global impact) - the academ ic believed their involvement in KTPs  We also introduced an incentive 
scheme at the university to reward 
academics enga ged in knowledge 
exchange and the KTP scheme 
specifically. I can say that 80% of 
promotions in the most recent year at 
[the consultee’s institution] were 
active ‘KTPers’. It is not just lip service, 
we are actually rewarding and 
promoting individuals who e ngage 
with the scheme  
KB representative consultee  
 
 Career outcomes are a key 
impact. A KTP can be career -
defining. For one academic, the 
publications that came out of a result 
of the KTP were the most cited of their 
career   
KB representative consultee  
66 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  enhanced their reputation in the field, enabling them to work with the BSI as well as other 
industrial partners.  
Additionality and contribution   
7.8 As part of the survey, academics were also asked whether the benefits described above would 
have been achieved anyway in the absence of the KTP. Overall, additionality for academics 
appears higher than businesses and associates. As shown in Table 7-1, 45% of respondents 
said outcomes were fully additional , i.e., they would not have been achieved at all without 
KTP funding. A further 52% cited partial additionality , whereby outcomes would have 
been achieved later, at a smaller scale and/or differed in nature  or quality . For academics, 
KTPs have played an important role in accelerating outcomes. Deadweight is very low.   
7.9 The case studies indicate d that, where outcomes were fully additional, this was because 
academic partne rs lacked the resources or incentives to engage with businesses and said 
there were no alternative ways to pursue research that would lead to the same level of 
benefits. Where outcomes were partially additional, academics explained that they could have 
engaged in alternative forms of industry engagement (e.g. , student projects) or shorter more 
academic led projects, but this would have reduced the benefits observed.  Again, these 
findings reinforce the rationale for the scheme.   
Table 7-1: Academic beneficiary  survey: would the benefits described above have 
been achieved anyway in the absence of the KTP project(s)? (n=93)   
N % 
Full additionality:  Would not have occurred at all  42 45%  
Partial additionality:  48 52%  
Would have occurred but later  27 29%  
Would have occurred but at a smaller scale  18 19%  
Would have occurred but different in nature or quality  17 18%  
All the benefits would have occurred at the same scale, speed and quality  2 2% 
Don't know  1 1% 
Refused  0 0% 
Source: SQW analysis of survey findings.  Note, responses for partial additionality (i.e. , 2-4) were not mutually exclusive  The evidence gathered points to high levels of outcome additionality amongst 
academics. For most surve y respondents, outcomes were fully or partially additional 
(the rate of full additionality is higher than for businesses or associates). Deadweight 
is low.  Moreover, for most academics surveyed, the KTP was the only factor that led 
to the benefits , a crit ical factor or made an important contribution alongside other 
factors . 67 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  7.10 Academics were also asked about other factors that may have contributed to the outcomes 
above and the relative importance of the KTP project(s).  A minority of respondents said 
the KTP was the only factor that led to the benefits (13%, 12), i.e. , no other factors played 
a role.  All other academics acknowledged that other factors had played a role (87%).  These 
included other support from elsewhere and/or their institution, or other 
business/knowledge transfer activities they were involved in. Nonetheless, KTPs played a 
key role in achieving benefits for academics (more so than businesses). As shown below, 
the KTP made  an important contribution alongside other factors (44%) or was the critical 
factor (39%) in achieving the benefits described above.  
Table 7-2: Academic beneficiary survey: in  light of this, what has been the relative 
importance of the KTP(s) in achieving the benefits previously discussed compared to 
these other enabling factors? (n=93)   
N % 
The KTP was the only factor in achieving the benefits  12 13%  
Where other factors were identified, the relative importance of the KTP:    
The KTP was critical relative to other factors  36 39%  
The KTP was important and contributed alongside other factors  41 44%  
The KTP contributed to outcomes but was less important relative to other 
factors  14 15%  
Don't know  1 1% 
Refused  1 1% 
Source: SQW analysis of survey findings  68 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Outcomes and impacts – wider benefits for KB institutions  
7.11 As part of the academic survey, we asked 
respondents to reflect on the extent to wh ich KTPs 
have a wider impact on their KB institution. The 
results are presented in Figure 7-2 and suggest 
that KTPs are benefiting KB institutions more 
broadly, by improving their reputation and 
profile , and improving attitudes towards 
business engagement and innovation. A 
minority of KB and other consultees also 
highlighted the impact of KTPs on institutions’ 
reputation for knowledge exchange and being 
business -friendly, and the way in which KTPs had 
influenced KB inst itutional cultures/attitudes 
towards business engagement. The latter was 
facilitated where KTP academics were promoted 
to senior positions. For other institutions where 
business engagement was already a priority, 
consultees said KTPs have still helped with  
progress in this area.   
7.12 Linked to the point above, a key long -term benefit 
reported by most KB representatives and other 
consultees w ere the relationships developed 
with KTP companies , which regularly led to 
further engagement (e.g. , use of facilities or  collaborative R&D projects) and the development 
of strategic partnerships. KB and KTA consultees described how KTPs have created “ a 
network ” and “ strong ecosystem of businesses that can be called on for future relationships and 
referrals ”, and act as a “gateway for companies to access the whole of the university’s resources ”.   
7.13  Survey and consultation feedback also suggest ed that KTPs help to strengthen cross -
disciplinary relationships within  institutions . The role of KTPs in supporting 
collaborations between different academic departments at the KB was also noted in the case 
studies and by a minority of KB and internal consultees, reflecting the inter -disciplinary 
nature of some KTP projects.    Reputationally, [the KTP scheme] 
has been really positive. Not just in 
the business community but being 
able to talk about the portfolio is 
good. It has contributed to things 
such as student recruitment.  As a lot 
of associates are graduates so there 
is an employability benefit to offer 
and advertise   
KB representative consultee  
 
 [My institution was] always 
minded to do knowledge exchange 
but lacked the confidence to do it 
and KTPs accelerated what was 
already there   
KB representative consultee  
KTPs have  benefit ed KB institutions more broadly, by improving their reputation and 
profile, improving attitudes towards business engagement and innovation , and 
widening and strengthening business networks. KTPs also provide material on 
impact  for REF/KEF case studies. The c ross -disciplinary nature of some KTP projects 
has also helped to  strengthen relationships within institutions.      69 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  7.14 KTP projec ts have  contributed to  the evidence base for REF and/KEF case studies . Over 
two-thirds of academics surveyed said their institution had used KTP evidence in this way.  
Almost all KB, KTA and HE representative consultees corroborated this . They stated that KTP 
impacts were regularly used as part of REF/KEF assessments to demonstrate impact, which 
in turn has potential  benefits in terms of further funding for the institution  as part of the wider 
package of material and evidence produced .      
Figure 7-2: Academic beneficiary survey: Do you think the KTP scheme as a whole has 
impacted on your institution in any of the following ways? (n=93)  
 
Source: SQW analysis of survey findings  
70 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  8. Impacts of the KTP scheme  on pl ace  
8.1 This Section explores whether there was evidence on if and how  KTPs have generate d place -
based benefits . This  respo nds to the research question relating to mechanisms through which 
KTPs bring about regional impacts. Th e primary sources of evidence were  feedback from 
consultations, surveys and case studies.   
8.2 It is important to start this Section by acknowledging that KTPs were not designed or set up 
to deliver local impacts specifically. It was and currently remains  a ‘place -agnostic ’ 
intervention. Even so, with growing policy interest in levelling up, the eva luation has explored 
whether KTPs do generate place -based benefits (and , if so, how). We have explored this from 
two angles: first, the scheme’s reach in terms of its funded activities ; and second, the extent 
to which projects funded generat ed local benefi ts where they were based (or even 
elsewhere).  
Spatial distribution of KTP inputs  
8.3 As illustrated in Section 3, the KTP has a wide reach across the UK   with 75% of beneficiary 
businesses and 68% of the KB partners being outside of London and the Greater Sou th East.  
This equate d to £158m  or 80% of total grant value spent outside of London and the Greater 
South East between 2010 and 2020.   
8.4 In Table 8-1, we also compare the location of KTP b eneficiary businesses to the le vel of 
deprivation across England. 28 As illustrated below, KTPs have support ed businesses to 
grow across areas with a mix of  depriv ation levels : the distribution of KTP businesses 
broadly mirrors the geography of deprivation, with , for example,  around one fifth of KTP 
businesses  in the 20% most deprived areas of England .  
 
28 This analysis has been completed on business beneficiaries in England only (75% of total), as the 
IMD does no t cover Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.    The KTP scheme has had a wide reach across the UK, with the majority of projects 
located outside of London and the Greater South East. Local benefits appear ed to be 
relatively  ad hoc and small scale, which reflects that these were not designed in to 
the scheme. The local benefits  included local employment created as a result of KTP -
generated business growth, KTP businesses being better able to contribute to local 
cluster development, and wider knowledge transfer to local businesses .  Th ere was 
also an example of KTPs being purposefully  integrated locally  to help strengthen  an 
area’s  innovation ecosystem . 71 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table 8-1: Location of KTP businesses in England compared to Index of Multiple 
Deprivation   
IMD decile rankings  for Lower Super O utput 
Areas  (LSOA)29 N of beneficiary businesses  % 
20% most deprived LSOAs   300  22% 
21% to 4 0% 279  20%  
41%  to 6 0% 284  21%  
61%  to 8 0% 300  22%  
20% least deprived LSOAs   219  16% 
Total   1382   
Source: English Indices of Deprivation, 2019  
8.5 In addition to KTPs being seen as a relatively accessible Innovate UK scheme (as discussed in 
Section 4), a key feature of the scheme’s design and delivery has been  the regionally based 
Knowledge Transfer Advisors (KTAs) across the UK. KTAs are embedded within research 
institutions and have  acted as an intermediary to facilitate access to the scheme and help to 
convene KTP s locally. The KTAs have  also play ed a wider conv ening role in helping  businesses  
to connect with KBs  or find associates to form a KTP project across the UK. This was 
particularly important for businesses  based in areas without any  (relevant ) KB expertise in 
close proximity, enabling them to draw on expe rtise from  elsewhere to innovate and grow.  
8.6 Moreover, the KTP scheme has recently trialled having additional capacity -building and 
networking support in some places that were lacking the capacity to apply  by increasing the 
number of KTAs in these areas. Whi lst this was beyond the timeframe in scope for this 
evaluation, it demonstrates how the scheme has adjusted the degree of facilitated access to 
reflect differences in capacity across different areas. It is expected to take a few years before 
changes in cap acities and behaviours can be assessed, but a long -term commitment to 
capacity building has scope to widen the reach of KTPs further.  
Generating place -based benefits  
8.7 We have explored whether KTP investments across the UK have  led to benefits for the place 
in which  they were located (and/or other locations). The survey results suggest KTP 
projects have  generat ed some benefits for their surrounding areas , though the results 
are mixed and proved difficult to confirm : 26% of beneficiary businesses surveyed and 
57% of academics surveyed s uggested that  KTPs had local benefits.    
8.8 We sought to explore these further through the case studies and found some (albeit limited) 
examples of local benefits. These were typically ad hoc and small scale , but included local 
emp loyment created  as a result of KTP -generated business growth, KTP businesses being 
 
29 Lower Layer Super Output Areas (LSOAs) are administrative  spatial boundaries that have an 
average population of 1,500 people, or 650 households.  72 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  better able to contribute to local cluster development, and wider knowledge transfer to 
local businesses . For example:  
• A KTP involving a Belfast -based television production  company generated employment 
in Belfast and was expected to continue to do so moving forward. Additionally, the 
business was said to have made an early contribution to the creative sector in Northern 
Ireland, which was described to be considerably more vi brant today than it was when the 
KTP began.  
• In Scotland, the growth of a business ’s data team , resulting from the KTP , has provided 
employment opportunities in Glasgow.  
• A software business  in Scotland has built on its success and become involved in Glasgow’s 
‘Smart city’ project, working to deploy smart systems and technologies. The business  has 
also interacted with the City Observatory project.  
• The KB was provided with a free version of th e software programme developed during 
the KTP which was used at a nearby college in Middlesborough for learning purposes.   
• In Sheffield, a KTP associate was  employed by the Advanced Manufacturing Research 
Centre (AMRC).  The associate was  sharing knowledg e gained from the KTP in relation to 
the manufacture of materials with a range of local (and national) businesses  via the 
AMRC’s consultancy services. Therefore, this provide s an example of how KTPs have 
helped to boost the skills and knowledge of a key or ganisation within a local cluster in the 
city region.  
8.9 A number of stakeholders consulted believed that 
KTPs should benefit the places in which they are 
located and noted the increasing drive for KBs to 
“forge a more involved and meaningful role in the 
local ecosystem that they work in ”. These 
consultees pointed to evidence to suggest that, in 
some places, KTPs were playing a r ole in 
strengthening innovation ecosystems , 
particularly where there was a critical mass of 
KTP projects , and they were explicitly integrated 
into wider innovation support in the area. Essex 
and Belfast were cited as interesting examples of 
this.  The majo rity of KTA consultees also stated 
that KTPs align ed well with strategic priorities 
in their local area  (7 of 8), although several 
consultees perceived this to be “ serendipitous ” 
and “ scattergun ” rather than strategically 
planned.   [The University of Essex’s rapid 
increase in KTP projects] has 
stimulated innovation in the region. [It 
is] not all due to KTP, but KTP has 
helped the investments they have 
made in an innovation centr e. KTP 
companies quite often set up their 
R&D in that centre. Now when you get 
things like that happening it is easier 
to draw in other agencies too; very 
symbiotic.        
KTA consultee  
73 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  8.10 An internal consultee pointed to a KTP project which focused on deprived communities and 
the significant economic divide from neighbourhood to neighbourhood in the North East and 
considered the ways in which to bring c ommunities together and improve social cohesion. 
This project was social science led, and so whilst was not likely to generate a high commercial  
return , it was expected to deliver social place -based benefits.  
8.11 It is also worth noting that our econometric analysis suggest ed that a project’s location 
(i.e. , region) d id not influence business impacts , so we can  conclude that the scheme has 
deliver ed benefits across the UK  and can continue to do so in the future . We  discuss this 
further in Section 10.  
Looking forward  
8.12 A key question arising from this analysis is whether there is scope to maximise place -based 
impacts further in future. For example, would other places benefit from adopting Essex’s 
model of integrating K TPs into the local innovation support ecosystem more explicitly? In 
places where there are multiple KTPs that align closely with local specialisms/priorities, is 
there scope for facilitating synergies between them? These suggestions would need to be 
active ly instigated by Innovate UK and /or by  local partners, and a case -by-case approach may 
need to be taken (not least to recognise the commercial sensitivities associated with some 
KTP projects).  
 74 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  9. Quantified i mpact analysis  
Econometric analysis of business  impacts  
Approach  
9.1 To estimate the net effects of KTPs on the business performance and productivity of 
beneficiaries, we followed a quasi -experimental approach – difference -in-differen ce (DiD).30 
This method compare d the changes in outcomes over time between  the treatment group – 
KTP beneficiaries (F1 , i.e., those fully completing,  and W3,  i.e., those completing but finishing 
early ) – and the comparison group – a group of businesses that did not take on a KTP but are 
similar in observable characteristics. DiD estimate d the net effect of KTP support, as only the 
growth that was observed in the treatment group beyond what was demonstrated by the 
comparison group is attributed  to the scheme . Figure 9-1 illustrates this principle.  
9.2 DiD analysis corresponds to level three on The Maryland Scientific Methods Scale (SMS) 
providing robust evidence of the KTP scheme’s impacts on businesses.31 In contrast to a pure 
time -series (differences across time) or cross -section (differences across treatment and non -
treatment groups) regression, DiD is able to mitigate biases in the estimates arising from the 
selection of the treatment group and outside facto rs. For example, KTP businesses may be 
innovation -active businesses that were expected to be on a fast growth trajectory even 
without the programme.  
 
30 A quasi -experimental approach  attempt s to establish a cau se-and-effect relationship in 
environments where a scientific experiment with random assignment of treatment is not feasible.  
31 This scale was first introduced in Farrington  et al . (2003 ). It ranks evaluation methods on a scale 
from one to five with higher numbers indicating more robust methods. Randomised control trials are 
typically placed at level five, while a cross -sectional comparison of treated and untreated groups, or 
before and aft er comparison of the treated only, with no additional controls is normally scored as 
one. A guide to the up -to-date version of the scale is available at https://whatworksgrowth.org/  The results from our econometri c analysis suggest that KTPs have had a positive 
statistically significant impact on the employment  and turnover growth  of 
beneficiary companies.  This positive impact was significant both during and 
following the KTP. The effects start ed in the first year of KTPs, which is likely to be 
explained by two points: i) opportunities for associates to make a difference early on 
in their time working with partner businesses; and ii) the fact that KTPs may be part 
of a broader set of business development actions.  Effects were sustained until three 
years after the KTP has finished.  We found no statistically significant relationship 
between KTPs  and productivity  as estimated using th e ratio between  turnover and 
employment.  75 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 9-1: Difference -in-difference approach  
 
Source: SQW   
9.3 Central to DiD analysis is an assumption that in the absence of KTPs, supported and 
unsupported businesses would have followed the same trajectory  (known as the parallel 
trends assumption) . If this assumption is violated, then the analysis may under - or over -
estimate the effect of support by wrongly attributing the effects of pre -existing group 
differences to the scheme . For example, if KTP beneficiaries grew quicker than the rest of the 
economy before the scheme , a comparison against the whole business population will 
overestimate the effect of KTP support.  
9.4 The following section sets out our approach to data -linking, identifying a suitable comparison 
group (using a statistical matching tec hnique – propensity score matching , PSM ), selecting the 
most appropriate specification for a DiD model , and how, as much as possible, ensured our 
findings are robust estimates of the true impact of KTP support.  
Identification of a pool of potential compar ator businesses  
9.5 To establish a counterfactual, i.e. , what would have happened in the absence of KTPs to the 
participating businesses, we linked data on KTP beneficiaries (F1/ completed projects and 
W3/ finished early projects) to businesses  from the wider business population using the 
Business Structure Database (BSD) accessed through the ONS Secure Research Service 
(SRS).32   
9.6 As a first step , we identified a pool of 10,000 potential comparator businesses in the 
Beauhurst database , ensuring that the selected businesses had similar data availability and 
 
32 Office for National Statistics, released 10 November 2021, ONS SRS Metadata Catalogue, dataset, 
Business Structure Database - UK, 10.57906/7kh0 -0910  
76 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  were well matched in key characteristics33 to KTP beneficiaries. Using t his ‘initial filter ’ had 
two advantages: (1) it allowed us to use Beauhurst characteristics not available in t he BSD for 
statistical matching which substantially improved the quality of the comparison groups ; (2) 
it sped up the analysis by reduc ing the computational demands of our model s (as we 
preselected 10,000 out of more than two million  businesses  available in the BSD ). 
Data -linking to the BSD  
9.7 We linked the monitoring information held by Innovate  UK on KTP participants and 
Beauhurst data on both KTP participants and the 10,000 pre -selected potential comparator s 
to administrative  data on turnover an d employment held in the BSD.  
9.8 Out of the 1,868 unique KTP beneficiaries, 1793 (96%)  were successfully identified in the 
BSD ., with a few more observations being dropped at the data cleaning stage due to 
insufficient data on their observable characteristic s. The final number of unique beneficiaries 
used in the analysis was 1,658 (89% of all beneficiaries) .   
9.9 For our analysis we considered several alternative comparison groups, three identified with 
propensity score matching from the pool  of the pre-selected  10,000 comparator businesses  
(A-C below) , and one based on businesses  from the monitoring information  provided by the 
client  (D below) .  
• (A) Our ‘preferred comparison group ’ identified with PSM using the fully completed (F1) 
and finished early (W3) KTPs a s beneficiaries.  
• (B) A comparison group identified with PSM but using only the fully completed (F1) KTPs 
as beneficiaries.  
• (C) A comparison group identified with PSM but using only businesses that had exactly 
one successful (F1 or W3) KTP.  
• (D) A comparison  group of successful KTP applicants where  the KTP never started or was 
withdrawn (W2).  
9.10 The results across our preferred and three alternative specifications were broadly consistent 
and we highlight any differences that emerged in our discussion below.  
Prop ensity Score Matching (PSM)  
9.11 We used PSM to identify comparison groups of companies with similar observable 
characteristics to the treated group . This approach  reduced the influence of selection bias  on 
the results.  The beneficiaries may be systematically different from the rest of the business 
population , and if this is not accounted for the findings may be inaccurate . For example, KTP 
 
33 To improve our matching  models in the SRS , we only selected compan ies that shared a five -digit 
SIC code with at least two KTP beneficiaries.   We also selected businesses to match the proportion of 
KTP beneficiaries “tracked” by Beauhurst and only chose businesses  with data in their financial 
statements and businesses  that have a website on Beauhurst.  77 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  businesses were much more likely to be tracked by Beauhurst, large and manufacturing 
companies than the wider business population.  
9.12 In using PSM  we sought  to create a comparison group consisting of businesses that were as 
likely to undertake a KTP as the actual beneficiaries. This imitates a ‘random’ allocation that 
could have been achieved  during a randomised control trial . 
9.13 Draw ing on both business characteristics recorded in the BSD as well as in Beauhurst to 
inform our matching model , and considering availability of data for KTP beneficiaries,  the 
final variables we used for our matching were  as follows : 
• Beauhurst: the Beauhurst tracking status of the business (tracked, not tracked, ceased 
tracking); and the credit rating of the business . 
• BSD: whether the business  was in operation before 2010; age of the business (old, 
medium, or young); s ize of the business in 2009 (micro, small, medium, large); sector of 
the business (by SIC group); company status of the business (company, not -for-profit, 
local authority, etc.).  
9.14 Annex F sets out the pre -matched and post -matched distributions of the probab ility to do a 
KTP. The graphs in Annex F show that the matching was successful in reducing bias in 
observable characteristics of the distribution of KTP businesses against the wider business 
population. This was reaffirmed through tests of sampling bias be tween the treatment and 
comparison group presented in Table F‑2.  
9.15 It is important to note that PSM is only able to match businesses on observable characteristics, 
i.e., characteristics that are recorded in the datasets available. Differences in unobservable  
characteristics may remain. For example, the propensity to seek support, the management 
style  of businesses , and growth ambitions are all unobservable and likely to be correlated 
with both business es’ success over time, as well as their likelihood to apply for a KTP . 
Therefore, to ensure the robustness of results, it was important to consider multiple 
complementary comparison groups.  
9.16 We repeated the process set out above and achieved a similar quality of match for our 
alternative specifi cations (B) and (C). For specification (D), no matching was undertaken. 
Examining the distribution of propensity scores and tests for whether biases were present 
both suggest ed that successful applicants where the KTP did not start or was withdrawn were 
statistically significantly different in observable characteristics to KTP beneficiaries.  
Specification (D) was therefore considered to be an unreliable comparison group.  
Difference in differences analysis  
9.17 To estimate the net impact of a KTP on business grow th we used a regression -based 
difference in differences analysis . To account for the differences in funding, timing and length 78 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  of KTPs, rather than just calculating the DiD statistic, we estimated our DiD models in a panel 
data regression34.  Specifying th e DiD model in this way has several advantages:  
• A common practice in DiD analysis is to ‘recast ’ the data in terms of the year supported . 
The problem with this approach, however, is that it is unclear which year should be “the 
year of support”  for unsuppo rted businesses. Furthermore, if a business has multiple 
KTPs, we are only able to use one of the KTPs in the regression analysis. Finally, as 
highlighted in section 3, the length of a KTP var ied significantly and by recasting the data 
we were not able to fully account for differences in treatment length.  
• Without recasting the time variable, KTPs are allowed to “switch on” and “switch off” over 
the evaluation period. For each beneficiary, the KTP “switches on” at som e point during 
the evaluation period and for the comparison group it stays “switched off” throughout. An 
added benefit of this approach is that businesses who undertook a KTP towards the end 
of the evaluation period can act as a comparison group for the ye ars in which they have 
not undertaken a KTP – effectively boosting our sample size for these years through a 
“pipeline” methodology.  
9.18 Table 9-1 shows the regression estimates of the net impact of KTPs on supported businesses’ 
employment, real turnover, and productivity (as measured by the ratio between  turnover and 
employment):  
Table 9-1: Difference in differences analysis of impacts of KTP support  
 (1)  
Ln(employment)  (2)  
Ln(real turnover)  (3)  
Productivity  
KTP ongoing  
1st year  0.0769***  
(5.47)  0.0904***  
(3.95)  -39.97  
(-1.11)  
KTP ongoing  
2nd year  0.146***  
(9.05)  0.140***  
(5.42)  155.7  
-0.93  
KTP ongoing  
3rd year  0.180***  
(10.31)  0.193***  
(6.87)  201.2  
-0.95  
KTP post support  
1st year  0.167***  
(10.08)  0.157***  
(6.25)  -133.9  
(-1.03)  
KTP post support  
2nd year  0.124***  
(6.83)  0.120***  
(4.56)  -159.8  
(-1.04)  
KTP post support  
3rd year  0.0760***  
(4.24)  0.0678**  
(2.5)  -187.3  
(-1.06)  
Group trend  0.0250***  
(6.12)  0.0187***  
(3.45)  -13.34  
(-1.16)  
t statistics in parentheses  
Level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01  
All regressions include time and business fixed effects and cluster -robust standard errors . Group specific trends are included to 
account for the possibility that even after matching treatment and control businesses were on a different growth trend before  
the KTP.  
 
34 This had a specification similar to the model with variable timing of treatment as suggested in 
Goodman -Bacon (2018).  79 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Source: SQW analysis  
9.19 Our findings indicate d that K TPs ha d a large and statistically significant benefit to business 
growth on both employment and turnover. The effect on both employment and turnover were 
positive and significant from year one of the KTP and were sustained for three years after the 
KTP ha d ended. The cumulative net difference in annual employment and turnover growth 
between KTP businesses and the comparison group was largest between the third year of 
ongoing support (for those businesses with at least three years of KTPs) and the first year  
following support. Almost all35 of the  results are statistically significant at the 1% level .36 
9.20 The results on employment and turnover  were specified with the outcome variable “log -
normalised”. When the original data does not follow the bell curve of a normal distribution, 
we can log transform this data to make it as “normal” as possible so that the statistical analysis 
results from this da ta become more valid. In other words, the log transformation reduces the 
skewness of our original data.  
9.21 The reported coefficient can be interpreted approximately  as the  net additional growth rate 
associated with treatment . For example, the highlighted coe fficient 0.167*** suggests that in 
the first year post support, KTP businesses have on average (approximately37) 16.7% more 
employees relative to their pre -treatment level than non -KTP businesses. The three stars 
indicate that this difference is statistica lly significant at the 1% level . 
9.22 Figure 9-2 and Figure 9-3 graphically demonstrate the impact of KTP support on business 
growth in turnover and employment.38 Here the vertical axis shows the natural logarithm of 
employment and turnover, indexed so that the year before the KTP started the variable is 
equal to 100.  Comparing these figures to Figure 9-1 summarising the DiD approach, they 
highlight how both the treatment and the comparison group experience growth on a similar 
trajectory before the KTP project and how the growth path of KTP beneficiaries diverges 
following support.  
9.23 Unlike our findings for employment and turnover, we found no statistically significant 
effect on productivity as measured by the ratio of turnover over employment.  There are, 
however, known measurement issues with the productivity proxy as the ratio of turnover 
over employment. Data on productivity is ‘noisy’ and volatile, especially when the analysis 
concerns fast -growing businesses, as when such a business is hiring additional workers, there 
may be a time lag before these workers become fully productive. From this perspective, we 
 
35 The third year post -support was significant only at the 5% level for turnover growth.  
36 To be “statisti cally significant at the 1% level” means that data such as this is only observed in at 
most  1% of samples  if there is no association between the explanatory variable of interest  (KTP 
engagement)  and an outcome . 
37 To calculate the exact interpretation of the coefficient you use exp(coeff) -1=impact . 
38 Note that to generate these graphs , the data had to be recast in terms of the year of support and the 
demonstrated impacts are not exactly equal to the estimated impact s of Table 9-1. Note also that the 
vertical axis is an index of a logarithm , and the shown growth is illustrative only and does not reflect 
estimated % growth in employment or turnover.  80 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  note that KTP beneficiaries did not experience a temporary ‘dip’ in productivity despite being 
on a steep gro wth trajectory in terms of their employment.  
9.24 Of particular interest in the analysis was the finding that KTPs had a statistically significant 
effect on employment and turnover during the first year of the KTP. We found this surprising 
as we expected there to be a short time lag between starting the KTP and the effect on 
business performance, especially for turnover. Two points potentially explain the findings:  
• First, associates were potentially able to bring about some ‘early wins’ once the KTP 
began, for i nstance through smaller initiatives within the business alongside the core of 
the KTP project. The evidence from the case studies backed this up.  
• Second, as previously reported, KTPs were often found to be one part of a broader set of 
activities designed t o develop the business. Therefore, the apparent early effects of the 
KTPs on performance may be partly attributable to this wider set of actions that 
businesses were undertaking.  
Figure 9-2: KTP impact on emp loyment  
 
Source: SQW analysis  
81 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure 9-3: KTP impact on real turnover  
 
Source: SQW analysis  
Impact by business size  
9.25 We have carried out  DiD regression analysis to  compare the impact of KTPs on micro/small 
(<100 employees) and medium/large (100+ employees) businesses.  This highlighted  two key 
messages: (1) KTPs are associated with statistically significant positive growth for both small 
and large companies; (2) In p ercentage terms, small companies grow faster after a KTP than 
large companies. For all periods during and after a KTP, this difference is positive. However, 
the difference in growth  is only statistically significant for employment from the second year 
of the KTP onwards and for turnover only in the second year of the KTP. More details can be 
found in Annex F.  
Sensitivity analysis  
9.26 To ensure the robustness of our results we tested for the impact of KTPs on employment and 
turnover across several model specific ations, definitions of the treatment group, and 
selections of the group of comparison businesses. These included  the following : 
• The three alternative specifications of the comparison group set out in the Propensity 
Score Matching (PSM) subsection above:  
➢ a  model where only completed KTPs (F1) and not finished early (W3) KTPs were used 
as beneficiaries  
➢ a model where businesses with multiple KTPs were removed from the analysis  
82 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  ➢ a model where the comparison group was not identified with PSM but defined as 
busi nesses that were accepted to a KTP , but the KTP did not start (W2) . 
• A simpler panel model where all treatment and post -treatment years were treated 
equivalently and we d id not distinguish between the first, second, and third year of each . 
• An alternative mo del that distinguishe d companies by their size but compare d SMEs 
against large companies and not small enterprises  against medium and large companies.  
• An alternative, “classical” DiD panel model where time was recast so all KTPs start ed at 
t=1 and treatmen t switche d on at t=1 for all KTP businesses and d id not switch off.  
9.27 Our results were robust to these different model specifications. Across all of the specifications 
tested,  KTPs were statistically significantly associated with increased growth in both turnover 
and employment.  The results from th e analysis presented in this section have fed through to 
our impact and value for money analysis presented in section 11.   83 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  10. Factors influencing KTP performance  
10.1 In this Section, we explore factors that have helped or hindered outcomes being achieved 
through KTPs, assessing the evidence against the original theory of change and underpinning 
assumptions.  This analysis draws on consultation feedback, surveys, case studies, close out 
reports and econometric analysis.  We also comment on factors that d id not appear to 
influence outcomes/impacts.  
Factors that do influence performance  
Three -way partnership model with quality relationships  
10.2 A three -way and industry -led partnership  enables an associate to focus exclusively on the 
project and provides the necessary  access to expertise from the KB  and buy -in from the 
business .  This was rai sed by consultees, in partner surveys, case studies and close out 
reports.  A distinctive feature of KTPs as a knowledge transfer mechanism is the intention to 
embed knowledge within the business and have a longer -term legacy effect.  The associate ’s 
role in doing the knowledge transfer as a key individual  based at the business  has been 
critical to success . It has  provid ed dedicated resource and capacity to focus on the challenge/  
opportunity in question , and applying and tailoring knowledge  and skills in a  context where 
they are situated  on a day -to-basis  (and therefore have a better understanding of business 
needs) .  Embedding knowledge also depend ed on complementary activities within the 
business , such as the associate developing learning resources/user m anuals, delivering 
presentations, training other staff, and providing shadowing opportunities for staff to 
understand new processes (as well as the businesses ’ capacity, culture and responsiveness, 
as we discuss further below).  The R&D outputs themselves also help ed to encourage 
businesses to embed the findings – for example, where the project prove d concepts, g ave 
management confidence to adopt and integrate new tools/methods (rather than 
outsourcing).  There was also evidence from close out reports to su ggest that businesses have Key factors that influence the success of KTPs include d: the three -way and industry -
led partnership model, with dedicated resource and knowledge transfer via an 
embedded associate and quality relationships between partners; a strong and 
realistic plan at the outset, with aligned goals and buy -in from a ll partners; close 
alignment between expertise and need; and having a  structured project.  Within the 
business, strategic fit and prioritisation of the KTP by the leadership team was 
important, alongside buy -in across the wider team.  T he fit, motivation, capability 
and calibre of the associate was “instrumental” to the success . Proximity between 
partners can be helpful, but was not always necessary ; in some cases, alignment of 
expertise and need was more important.  Neither  the region nor sector of the 
business were significant determinant s of growth as a result of the KTP.     84 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  changed policies and protocols to ensure learning from KTP is actioned, or invested further 
(typically using internal or grant funding) to ensure that KTP knowledge was fully embedded.  
10.3 The presence of a strong, realistic plan at the outset, with aligned vision and buy -in from 
all partners was considered critical to success.  This was identified in the consultations, 
surveys, case studies and close out reports.  Consultees and beneficiaries highlighted the 
importance of allowing su fficient resource for a detailed project planning  phase (even pre -
application) to clearly and collaboratively define the vision and purpose of the project. Close 
alignment between academic expertise, associate skills and business needs  was also 
raised as b eing important by the large majority of academics, associates and businesses 
surveyed39.  Projects have struggled where partner priorities or goals have been misaligned, 
or objectives were not clearly articulated or were  overly ambitious at the outset (lea ding 
difficulties in managing expectations or excessive time spent replanning and refocusing).    
10.4 The quality of partner relationships  was  important40.  This was aided by regular contact 
and collaborative working between partners. Almost all academics surveyed and the majority 
of businesses said regular contact was important in achieving benefits41.  As discussed above, 
in many cases, some  partners knew each other before the KTP, and so had foundations on 
which to build.  According to close ou t reports, this also meant less time was needed in the 
preparatory stages and more resource could be invested in the R&D activities.  
Communication and language barriers, and differences in ways of working, have hindered 
progress in some projects.  
10.5 Strong a nd structured project management was found to be key to success.  The business 
and associate were central to this, and consultees also highlighted the ongoing support during 
implementation from KTAs/KT Managers (including advice, training, mentoring, admin  
support, and monitoring to keep on track).  KTAs were described by one consultee as “ the 
linchpin of the whole process ”.  Stakeholder consultees and case studies noted the helpful 
structure and momentum provided by Innovate UK’s monitoring arrangements.  Regular 
meetings with m onitoring officers also provided projects with the opportunity to reflect and 
an ‘external’ perspective on progress and direction, and encouraged project partners to 
maintain their focus on delivering outcomes.  
10.6 Finally, Innovate UK’s  (and its predecessor’s) long term commitment to the KTP scheme  and 
this three -way partnership model has been important in success.  Consultees suggested it has 
sent a signal to the KB regarding the UK’s commitment to knowledge exchange.  It has also 
enabl ed the retention of delivery/support staff with extensive experience (for example, in 
addressing challenges encountered by KTP projects).  Furthermore, consultees commented 
on the flexibility of the KTP model and its ability to adjust to “ real world challe nges ”.  The 
 
39 When asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 
was not at all important and 5 was very important, 83% of academics rated this as 4 or 5, as did 82% 
of associates and 80% of businesses.  
40 For example, when  asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 
5, 92% of academics rated quality of relationships as 4 or 5 out of 5  
41 When asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 5, 96% of 
academ ics rated regularity of contact as 4 or 5 out of 5, and 82% of businesses.  85 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  flexibility of KTP projects was also noted in the close out data, where KTPs were considered 
to be a cost effective method to deliver innovation projects that allows for full creativity and 
tailoring to business needs.      
Business characteris tics and approach to KTPs  
10.7 The evaluation evidence has found that the characteristics and approaches of business 
partners were  important in driving the success of KTP projects.  First, the strategic fit and 
prioritisation of KTP within the business was crit ical.  This include d the need for a strong 
fit between the KTP project and business strategy42, a strong case for investment, and 
commitment to the KTP by business leadership (including those with decision -making 
powers).   
10.8 Consultees noted how important i t was for staff across the wider business to fully 
understand and buy  in to the project  to ensure knowledge was embedded, sustained and 
acted upon more generally across the business .  The case studies illustrate d this further, 
where projects appear ed to be successful if the business understood the “ethos of KTP” (i.e. 
KTPs are a mechanism for collaborative R&D and knowledge exchange, rather than 
contracting academic expertise) and where there has been strong inter nal involvement to 
support project delivery (e.g. where sales and marketing team engaged and tested products 
developed) .  
10.9 The capacity of the business to (i) deliver the KTP effectively and engage with the 
project and (ii) absorb the knowledge generated  by the KTP were found to be  key enablers 
of success43.  In part, this was linked to buy -in from the leadership team, their willingness to 
dedicate sufficient resource to the project and their openness/receptiveness to innovation.  
Outcomes have been hindered  where businesses have lacked a willingness to fully engage in 
the KTP project or have had limited absorptive capacity.  The close out data suggest ed that  
projects that were not fully scoped at the outset and/or involve d small  or inexperienced 
businesses h ave faced challenges in this respect.  
10.10  Finally in this sub -section, the econometric analysis found that business 
characteristics such as age, size and whether they were classed as a high growth firm44 were 
significantly associated with growth in employment and turnover achieved by KTP 
businesses.  Smaller and younger companies were more likely to experience higher growth in 
employment and turnover. This is unsurprising as the analysis is based on growth rates, and 
so smaller and younger companies can more re adily achieve  higher rates  of growth .  It does 
not mean that KTPs with large/older companies do not lead to  similar  outcomes.  There were 
mixed views from the consultations on the extent to which business size can influence 
 
42 When asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 
was not at all important and 5 was very important, 87% of businesses rated this as  4 or 5  
43 For example, when asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 
5, where 1 was not at all important and 5 was very important, 81% of businesses rated their capacity 
to engage with the project as 4 or 5 and 82% r ated the importance of their capacity to implement 
changes identified in the KTP project as 4 or 5.  
44 Using Beauhurst tracking status  86 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  success.  Some consultees (notab ly KTAs and KB representatives) have found that some small 
businesses  can struggle with capacity to “create useful outputs” from a KTP, whereas others 
were perceived to be more agile with the potential for large impacts .  Consultees have 
observed challenge s in implementing change in large businesses where the KTP project lead 
from within the business d id not have decision -making authority (or where the approval of 
change was highly bureaucratic).   
Associate recruitment and approach to KTPs  
10.11  There was consis tent feedback from all sources of evidence that the fit, motivation, 
capability and calibre of the associate  was “instrumental” to the success of a KTP project45.  
This emphasises the importance of effective recruitment processes, their embeddedness 
within  the business, and support provided by the business, academic and KTA.  Sufficient 
support for the associate appears to be particularly important, and requires capacity from the 
business (and others) to deliver this.  The KTP offers significant ‘in -role’ a nd ‘hands -on’ 
learning for the associate, alongside dedicated training resource.  The large majority of 
associates surveyed rated the latter as important in generating outcomes46.  Associates also 
highlighted the alignment between the project and their own  aspirations47. The consultations, 
case studies and close out data provided evidence of cases where issues with the associate 
had meant that a KTP project did not achieve its aims.  Examples included delays in 
recruitment, associates not being suitably knowledgeable, skilled or broadly adept to the role, 
a poor fit between associate interests  and business needs, or associates leaving the post with 
subsequent difficulties in finding a replacement.  
Knowledge base expertise and approach to KTPs  
10.12  The expertise and approach of the KB was important, though  less extensively than the 
factors outlined above.  This include d having relevant expertise for business  needs , and 
proactive and senior support for KTPs  within KB institutions (as discussed in Sect ion 4).  
The ability of academics to adapt their knowledge to meet the specific needs of businesses 
was identified in our theory of change  assumptions as a factor that may influence success, but 
it was not raised as a key enabler or barrier in the evaluati on.  This may reflect the fact many 
academics had prior experience of working with (or in) industry, and therefore were well 
equipped in this area already.   
Proximity between KTP partners  
10.13  The econometric analysis found that  the further the distance betwee n the KB partner 
and the business the lower the effect of KTPs on business growth. However, this effect was 
 
45 For example, when asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 
5, where 1 was not at  all important and 5 was very important, 80% of businesses rated this as 4 or 5  
46 When asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 
was not at all important and 5 was very important, 75% of associates rated th is as 4 or 5  
47 When asked to rate importance of this factor to achieving outcomes on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 
was not at all important and 5 was very important, 79% of associates rated this as 4 or 5  87 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  only statistically significant for employment in the first year following the KTP.  The case 
studies provided multiple examples of where close geogr aphical proximity between partners 
had aided regular communication and better partnership working.  However, this is not to say 
that distance between partners means that a KTP cannot work.  Consultees highlighted that 
alignment between expertise and need w ere key, and for some projects where requirements 
were quite specialised, this meant that businesses could not access the right expertise in close 
proximity.  It also depends on the nature of the project and how important face -to-face contact 
is in that co ntext.  The strength of partner relationships (including before KTPs) will also 
influence how successfully partners can work together at distance.  Whilst outside of the 
timeframe of this evaluation, consultees for the case studies noted that  the increase in remote 
working during Covid -19 has facilitated greater engagement between geographically 
dispersed partners.  The experience of Covid -19 has also no doubt improved the skills of 
relevant parties to work remotely.  
10.14  Our overall conclusion from this is that proximity between partners can be helpful, 
but is not always necessary, especially in projects where the alignment of expertise and 
need is more important and/or where businesses do not have the right expertise in their area.   
Other project -related factor s 
10.15  The econometric analysis has found that completing the full length of a KTP  also 
made a difference to employment impacts.  Specifically, KTPs that finished early (W3) have a 
lower overall growth rate in employment than KTPs that were fully completed (F1)  (though  
the effect on turnover was insignificant ). Longer KTPs were more likely to grow in turnover 
between the start and the end of support, though  this may just be observed as the time 
distance between before and after is longer.  
10.16  The evaluation has iden tified other factors that have hindered outcomes from  being 
realised, many of which are typical of R&D projects and reflect the risk/uncertainty associated 
with undertaking this type of activity rather than any ‘failure’ of the scheme.  For example, the 
close out reports refer red to R&D being more complicated than expected and therefore taking 
more time to deliver (and in some cases, not reaching commercialisation as intended by the 
end of the KTP project), R&D disproving a new technology, and difficulties in commercialising 
products due to market forces.   
External factors  
10.17  The evaluation identified a range of external factors that have influenced the success 
(or otherwise) of KTP projects.  Specifically, this included:  
• effective integration with other busi ness support throughout the business’s journey (the 
approach in Wales was cited as an example of where this works effectively) and wider 
support from the KB institution  or elsewhere for academics  88 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  • Brexit and (towards the end of the evaluation period) Covid -19, which  hindered associate 
recruitment, and decreased appetites for investment in R&D and innovation  
• wider market barriers and economic uncertainty , for example creat ing challenges for 
businesses seeking to launch new products   
• wider R&D activities and investment by the business  before/after KTP, reflecting the 
finding that most were already innovation active and KTPs were part of a wider 
growth/investment strategy . 
Factors that do not influence business  performance  
10.18  Based on the econometric analysis, the  following factors did not appear to influence 
the impact of KTPs on business performance:  
• Number of KTPs undertaken:  Businesses  on their second or third KTP did not appear 
to perform significantly better or worse than those on their first KTP . 
• Grant value:  The grant value appear ed insignificant  
• Type of institution of the KB partner : This was not a strong predictor for KTP 
performance . 
• Sector of the business partn er: This was not a strong predictor for KTP performance . 
• Region of business : Overall, region was not a significant determinant of the growth of a 
KTP business following s upport. This suggest ed that KTPs were likely to deliver the 
outcomes described in this report across the country.  One note was that Scottish 
businesses on average grew statistically significantly faster in employment for 3 years 
after the KTP.89 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  11. Contribution and V alue -for-Money  analysis  
11.1 This Section has two parts: first, we provide an overall assessment of the contribution of the 
KTP to achieving outcomes and impacts, structured using three key questions that underpin 
the Contr ibution Analysis approach; and second, we provide a quantified  estimate of value -
for-money (VfM) of the scheme.  
Contribution Analysis  
11.2 As set out in Section 1, we have adopted a theory -based approach to the evaluation, using the 
logic model and theories of change as a framework to asse ss whether and how KTPs have 
brought about intended outcomes and impacts that would not happen otherwise (or not as 
quickly, to the same scale, and/or to the same quality).  Contribution analysis is a theory -
based approach that enables us to do this in a s tructured way.  Below, we have synthesised 
the evidence presented in this report to assess the KTP scheme’s contribution to observed 
outcomes and impacts by constructing a “contribution story” against three key questions.   
Is there a reasoned theory of ch ange, and have activities been implemented as set out in 
the theory of change?   
11.3 There is a reasoned logic model and theory of change, as set out in this report.  The primary 
challenges that hindered academic and business engagement were information failur es 
(notably in terms of what academic expertise  existed,  what  business needs were, and joining 
the two ), risk and resource constraints.  This aligned closely with the original rationale for the 
scheme.  However, there was less evidence to support the rationale that businesses that lack 
a track record in R&D and/or have no history of collaborating with the Knowledge Base.  The 
motivations of business, academic and associate partners also aligned with KTP aims, which 
suggests that  the scheme was  targeted appropriately on partners/projects that were seeking 
to achieve the outcomes set out in the KTP logic mode l.  The purpose of KTPs also align ed well 
with strategic priorities of KB institutions, and more widely with Government priorities for 
innovation and growth.   Overall, there is a reasoned  theory of change for the KTP scheme, and activities have 
been broadly implemented as intended.  There is consistently positive evidence that 
the expected results have occurre d for businesses, academics and associates involved 
in projects, and the wider KB.  The KTP scheme  has made an important or critical 
difference to the outcomes observed, although the prior experience of those involved 
and alignment with wider growth/invest ment strategies withi n businesses has also 
been important in realising benefits.    90 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  11.4 Between 2010 and 2020, the scheme was delivered as intended in terms of supporting R&D 
projects that have a three -way partnership and focus on business -led challenges  and 
opportunities.  As a rolling scheme, there are no annual targets for KTPs for  spend or the 
number of projects supported, so it is difficult to assess whether the scale of activity w as as 
expected . That said,  the number of completed projects has been consistently  in the region of 
200 -300 in most years. Facilitated access and support f rom KTAs  were  important to raise 
awareness and encourage engagement with the scheme, alongside alignme nt with 
institutional priorities  and incentives and senior backing from the academic perspective.  In 
terms of reach, the majority of businesses were innovation active and had experience of 
engaging with academia prior to their KTP, and likewise most acade mics were not new to 
engaging with industry before their first KTP.  There was some evidence of businesses and 
academics taking part without this background and prior experience, but g iven the rationale 
above, we might have expected to see more without a h istory of this type of activity.  
11.5 The large majority of projects were completed as planned (in terms of timescales and 
objectives) and overall levels of satisfaction with KTP processes and project implementation 
were high.  There have been some challenges in implementing activities as planned, notably 
where there have been issues relating to associate fit/retention, misalignment of partner s’ 
aims , a lack of partner communication, commitment or capacity to engage with the project, or 
wider issues (e.g. techn ical complexities associated with R&D or wider market forces).  The 
nature and extent of these challenges are not unexpected for R&D and innovation 
programmes.    
Is there evidence that the expected results have occurred?  
11.6 Overall, the findings suggest what was expected to happen in the theory of change has been 
achieved, and routes to impact were broadly as anticipated. The KTP funding has enabled R&D 
activities that would not have gone ahead or not in the same form without KTP funding, i.e. 
almost all activ ities were fully or partially additional.   
11.7 As a result of the KTP projects, the large majority of businesses have observed the 
intermediate outcomes set out in the logic model, in terms of process and product innovation, 
improved capabilities , and increas ed investment in R&D.  In turn, this has led to sustained 
impacts on business  performance, notably employment (including high quality jobs) and/or 
turnover (including exports).  KTPs have a legacy effect for most businesses  in terms of 
influencing percepti ons of, and capability to undertake, innovation and engage with academia. 
Many of the relationships with academic/KB partners have continued since the project ended.  
Outcomes in the logic model associated with patents, raising follow -on finance and exits/  
company sales, and new start -ups were less common  – though we would expect this .  There 
do not appear to be major unexpected or unintended consequences associated with the 
scheme for businesses. Challenges encountered by a minority mainly related to the l evel of 
resource required to operate the KTP successfully, manage the administration and support 
the associate.  91 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  11.8 Similarly for associates, the evidence suggest ed that the outcomes in the logic model have 
been achieved as expected.  There was strong evidence  that KTPs have improved associates’ 
technical and business skills, helped to accelerate career progression, created employment 
opportunities (at the KTP business  and elsewhere) and, for some, increased earnings.  
11.9 KTPs have brought about benefits to academ ic project partners and their wider KB 
institutions as intended.  Even though most academics had prior experience of engaging with 
industry, the majority have still strengthened relationships with businesses and improved 
their knowledge of industry challen ges, which has led to more industry -relevant research and 
teaching materials, academic publications, and the leverage of further funding.   KTPs have 
also helped to progress academic careers, but this outcome was less prominent than the other 
benefits note d above. KTPs appear to have a knock -on benefit for KB institutions, including 
their reputation and profile, improving attitudes towards business engagement and 
innovation, and providing material on impact for REF/KEF case studies.   
Was it the KTP scheme,  rather than other influencing factors that made the difference, or 
the decisive difference?   
11.10  The evidence on outcome additionality and the relative contribution of KTPs suggests 
that the scheme did play an important , and in some cases critical , role in g enerating the 
outcomes observed.  Businesses and associates were more likely to state that outcomes were 
partially additional rather than fully additional, but for academics there was more of an even 
balance between partial and fully additionality.  For al l partners, deadweight was very low, 
indicating the KTP has played a role and very few would have achieved all the outcomes 
anyway without that support.  The evidence from the econometric analysis was strong in 
pointing to KTPs making a significant differe nce to employment and turnover growth rates of 
businesses, including over a sustained period both during and after the KTP projects.  
11.11  However, other influencing factors have been identified that helped to facilitate 
outcomes. This include d characteristics a nd behaviours of partners involved as well as 
external factors.  It is important to recognise that prior experience of innovation and 
business/academic engagement (and in some cases, pre -existing relationships between 
partners), alongside the KTP funding, will have  put many projects in a strong position to drive 
through the intended outcomes.  Also, KTPs were often strategically important to the business 
and formed part of wider growth agendas and business development activities.  This wider 
drive and inves tment (before, alongside and after the KTP) will have  also play ed a role in 
improving business performance.  
11.12  Therefore, the evidence indicates that the KTP scheme has made a significant 
difference to the intended outcomes, and this is likely to be alongside  other complementary 
factors.  92 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Value -for-money analysis  
11.13  We assessed the VfM of the KTP scheme by q uantifying and monetising  the net impact 
on businesses and associates who were no longer employed at the KTP business . The impact 
on associates still employed at the KTP business was excluded  (to avoid double counting) , 
because this was already assumed to be included in the impacts on businesses .  
11.14  The VfM assessment on the business side was underpinned by the findings from the 
econometric analysis of net impacts of KTPs on beneficiary companies  (as reported on in 
section 9) . For the associates, the VfM assessment was based on findings from our survey of 
associates. Finally, the costs of the KTP scheme were calculated using data on grants, scheme  
management costs and business contributions . The cost information  was provided b y 
Innovate  UK. 
11.15  Our approach to estimat ing the net impact of KTPs is summarised in Figure 11-1 
below:  
Figure 11-1: Approach to estimating the net impact of KTPs  
 
Source:  SQW  
We estimate the impact of the KTP scheme  on the UK economy over the 2010 to 2020 
period to be between £1.7 and £2. 3 billion in 2020 prices/values . Compared to a total 
scheme  cost of £411 million in 2020 prices/values (including beneficiary 
contributions to project costs) , this is equivalent to a £4.2 0 to £5. 50 of net additional 
GVA for every £1 spent on KTPs . 93 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  KTP net impact – businesses  
11.16  To calculate the net impact of the KTP scheme  on supported businesses, we used the 
estimated cumulative net additional real turnover from the econometric analysis in  Table E-2. 
For the purposes of VfM we used  the estimates we obtained when differentiating  by business 
size to reflect that small businesses , on average , grew  faster than medium and large 
businesses.  
11.17  Using the data on employment and turnover in the Business Structure Dat abase  
(BSD ), we calculated the average business size of both small and medium/large KTP 
businesses48 in the year before the KTP. These data are shown in Table 11-1 below:  
Table 11-1: Average business size in year before KTP  
Pre KTP size:  Micro or small businesses  
(0 - 99 employees)49 Medium or large businesses  
(100+ employees)  
Mean employment  25 763  
Median employment  15 253  
Mean real turnover  £3,845,000  £211,845,000  
Median real turnover  £1,634,000  £38,519,000  
Source: SQW analysis  
11.18  Due to a tail of  larger companies  in the sample , the median represent ed a better 
estimate of the average business size and we used median turnover to calculate the GVA 
impacts shown below.  
11.19  Not all KTP projects lasted the same length , and we needed to estimate the impacts 
during KTPs for between one and three years . Projects were attributed impacts according to 
their length. Project that lasted up to 18 months were attributed 1 y ear of impacts, between 
18 and 30 months 2 years of impacts, and  projects that lasted over 30 months were attributed 
the full 3 years of “ongoing” impacts from  Table E-2. 
11.20  The net additional impact of KTPs on real turn over was calculated for each year in 
2010 to 2020  using the number of KTP projects that started in that year (F1 and W3 only). 
Cumulative ongoing effects were only attributed to the KTP scheme  as long as they were 
statistically significant and at most for 6 years ( i.e. for 3 year long KTPs , if 3 years post KTP 
they  were statistically significant).  
 
48 As in the econometric analysis, large outlier compan ies with 5000+ employees were excluded from 
the analysis.  
49 The number small/ large distinction at 100 employees was chosen to maintain significant sample 
sizes in both groups for the econometric analysis.  94 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  11.21  We translated the net additional turnover impact of the KTP scheme  by using annual 
GVA to turnover ratios50 for the main sectors of KTP businesses and the sec tor profile of KTP 
beneficiaries observed in the BSD.51 
11.22  Finally, we accounted for other additionality considerations as follows to translate the 
net additional GVA impact into a net impact attributable to the KTP scheme : 
• Displacement: A portion of the additional growth experienced by KTP businesses may  
replac e activity in non -KTP businesses as the companies were active in competitive 
markets. In accordance with t he HCA Additionality Guidance, we set displacement to 
29.3%52. 
• Leakage: As we used BSD data on UK economic activity to measure the impact of KTPs, 
and we are interested in the UK wide economic benefits of the KTP scheme , leakage was 
set to zero.  
• Substitut ion: KTP supported businesses may undertake a KTP in lieu of other growth 
projects which would have also generated economic benefits. However, the comparison 
businesses in our DiD models would still be able to undertake these other projects so our 
estimate d impacts were assumed to be net -additional to the benefits of them. Hence 
substitution was set to zero . 
• Deadweight: Our DiD estimation estimate d only the additional growth of supported 
businesses relative to the comparison group,  and so the DiD was assumed to capture any 
deadweight effects.   
• Attribution: Our qualitative research suggest ed that for many supported businesses, the 
KTP coincide d with other activities as part of business development, i.e. a  period where 
businesses undertook significant efforts to grow their size. If this is true about supported 
businesses but not the comparison group, a portion of the estimated impact may be 
attributabl e to these other activities, which could include other public interventions . We 
have set two different conservative estimates of this non-attributable effects in our 
analysis: 20% and 40%.  These were derived from responses to the business survey on the 
extent to which reported benefits were due to the KTP as a factor alone or in combination 
with other factors.  The results presented below reflect this range of uncertainty.  
11.23  Attributing our estimated gross impacts to the KTP scheme  in this way, we estimate 
that on the business side, between 2010 and 2020, KTPs have increased UK GVA by between 
£1.7 and £2.2 billion GVA.  
 
50 Using data from the Annual Business Survey: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/business/businessservices/datasets/uknonfina
ncialbusinesseconomyannualbusinesssurveysectionsas  
51 37% manufacturing, 12% Information and Communication, 20% Professi onal and Scientific 
Research Services, 9% Wholesale and Retail, 22% Other (UK average).  
52 HCA additionality guidance, 4th edition, for business development & competitiveness interventions  
indicates 29.3%  95 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  KTP net impact – associates  
11.24  To estimate the net impact of the KTP scheme we also estimate d the impact o n 
associates. However, to avoid double counting benefits, we only consider ed those associates 
who were no longer at the KTP business.53 
11.25  In our survey of associates, we included a question on the salary uplift at the end of 
the KTP and at the time of the survey due to the KTP project . Using thes e two estimates, and 
assuming a linear growth path in between, we estimate d the cumulative gross salary impact 
of the KTP scheme  across the associates in our survey . Note, the first value, their salary uplift 
at the time of completing their first KTP, was converted into 2020  prices using GDP 
deflators.54 
11.26  This salary impact was translated into a gross  GVA impact based on assumptions and  
ONS data . First, salary was converted to employment costs using a fixed rate of 15%. This 
assumes that the employer’s National Insurance and pensions contributions were around 
15% of salaries. Employment costs were converted into GVA using a ratio derived the ONS’s 
Annual Business Survey sectoral data on employment costs and approximate GVA.55 The ratio 
of these two, for the relevant sector, convert ed the cumulative employment costs into an 
approximate GVA figure for the period since the associate finished their first KTP.  
11.27  The final  stage in calculating this impact was the gross -to-net conversion. This 
reduce d the gross benefits, retaining only those benefits that were additional due to the KTP . 
In our  associate survey we  asked if they felt that the same benefits would have occurred,  to a 
lesser extent, at a lower quality, or over a longer timeframe, if they did not take part in the 
KTP.  We then reduced the gross cumulative benefits calculated above to match the survey 
responses on each question to calculate our net impact.  
11.28  Finally, we scaled up the calculated impact to the KTP population. This was informed 
by the analysis in section  6 that showed that our survey of associates was representative of 
the overall associate population in terms of K TP timing and proportion of W3 and F1. Our 
estimates suggest that the total net additional impact of KTPs on GVA through 
associates who were no longer at the KTP business was £38.4m . This is the equivalent of 
£20.6k net cumulative GVA per associate that was  no longer at the KTP business.  
Benefits to cost comparison f or the KTP scheme  
11.29  To calculate the benefit to cost ratio f or the KTP scheme  we used the ratio of the net 
impact of the KTP scheme over the total scheme  costs  for the period 2010 to 2020 . 
 
53 It is worth noting that in this way we are not est imating the overall impact of KTP associates but 
just a fraction of it . 
54 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/gdp -deflators -at-market -prices -and-money -gdp 
55 Sector was included in our survey of associates and matched to ABS definitions. When no data was 
available we used economy wide averages.  96 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  11.30  To calculate the overall net impact, we add the estimated net impacts on businesses 
(£1.7 to £2.2 billion) to the net impact on associates no longer at the KTP business (£ 41 
million). This gives us an estimated net impact of the scheme  of £1, 707 million to £2, 263 
million.  
11.31  To calculate the net present value of the total KTP costs between 2010 and 2020,  
including the business contribution , we used ONS data on the GDP deflator  data56 to express  
the scheme  costs in 2020 prices /values . This inflation data matche d the data used in the SRS 
to transform turnover into real turnover data  and the data used to transform associate 
impacts . The total costs of the KTP scheme  between 2010 and 2020 were estimated to be  
£411m in 2020 prices/values  (£264m excluding the business contribution).  
11.32  Taking the ratio of scheme  impacts over scheme  costs, we estimate that the return on 
investment of the KTP scheme  is between £4. 20 to £5. 50 of net additional GVA for every £1 
spent on KTPs  in the period .57  
Table 11-2: Costs and benefits of the KTP scheme  
 High case  attribution (80%)  Low case  attribution (60%)  
Costs: grants and operating  £263.7m  £263.7m  
Costs: business contribution  £147.0m  £147.0m  
Total costs  £410.7m  £410.7m  
Associate impacts  £38.4m  £38.4m  
Business impacts  £2,224.3m  £1,668.2m  
Total impacts  £2,262.7m  £1,706.6m  
BCR  5.5 4.2 
BCR (excluding business 
contribution)  8.6 6.5 
Source: SQW analysis  
 
56 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/gdp -deflators -at-market -prices -and-money -gdp 
57 Counting only costs to UKRI  and excluding business contributions, the estimated BCR is 6.5 to 8. 6.  97 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  12. Conclusions     
Key findings  
Overall performance  
12.1 Overall, the KTP scheme has achieved its core objective of helping businesses in the UK 
to innovate and grow, and has made a substantial contribution to the UK economy:    
• KTPs between 2010 and 2020 have gen erated an estimated £1.7 and £2.2 billion in net 
GVA for the UK economy. These impacts are based on the estimated effects on business 
growth and on the earnings of associates, and are Green Book/Magenta Book compliant 
in their methodologies.   
• The scheme h as delivered strong value for money over this period: for every pound of 
public and private investment, the scheme has generated a return of £4.20 to £5.40 in net 
economic benefits.  
 Design and implementation  
12.2 The scheme aligns well with Government priorities for innovation  and with strategic 
priorities of KB institutions, which have become more closely aligned with KTPs over the 
evaluation period with an increasing requirement to demonstrate impact, including through 
knowledge exchange.  KTPs are viewed as important in the innovation ecosystem and do not 
appear to duplicate other forms of support .  However, the scheme could be better aligned 
and integrated with the wider innovation support landscape in practice, and this could help 
to maxi mise the benefits of KTPs further and attract new types of applicant that may not have 
collaborated with the KB previously.  Overall levels of satisfaction with KTP processes and 
project implementation were high , although feedback on the associate recruitm ent 
processes and marketing/promotion of the scheme were mixed.  
Business benefits  
12.3 The KTP scheme has helped businesses  to mitigate the risk of investing in innovation, 
addressing resource constraints and, to some extent, information failures for both busin esses 
and academics that hindered collaboration.  KTP resources have been focused on projects that 
were strategically important to most of the businesses participating.  
12.4 KTPs have helped businesses  to undertake both product and process innovation .  This ha s 
led to business performance improvements.  According to the econometric analysis, impacts 
on the growth rate of employment and turnover were statistically significant , and were 
sustained throughout the KTP and for three years following completion.  Wider  feedback 
suggested that KTPs have led to high quality jobs and helped businesses to generate 
additional turnover from exports.  Whilst some businesses reported benefits to productivity, 98 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  the econometric analysis found that impacts on productivity were not statistically significant. 
That said, KTPs have helped to strengthen the underpinning drivers of productivity , such 
as skills, R&D investment and process innovation.   Outcomes were still being attributed to 
the KTP, even where the project finished a numbe r of years ago, demonstrating the 
sustainability of outcomes .  KTPs have influenced businesses’ perceptions of, and capability 
to undertake, R&D, thereby making future innovation activities more likely. The evidence 
indicated that many of the relationships  between businesses and KB partners were pre -
existing, and these have often been strengthened and have continued since the project ended.  
Academic benefits  
12.5 KTPs have enabled academic partners to strengthen their knowledge of industry challenges, 
leading t o more industry -relevant research and teaching materials,  academic 
publications, and helping them to lever further funding .  KTPs have helped to strengthen the 
ability of academics to engage with businesses and transfer knowledge.  KTPs have also 
helped to  progress academic careers, and a small number have generated IP and/or spinout 
businesses.  KTPs have had a legacy effect for academics : almost all academics surveyed 
said the benefits gained from the KTP were sustained after it was completed and the majority 
of those academics continued to reap the benefits.  
12.6 KTPs have generated wider benefits for the KB institution , including improved profile and 
credibility, providing material on impact for REF/KEF case studies, and widening and 
strengthening busines s networks.  There was evidence that demonstrated how KTPs have 
influenced attitudes towards business engagement and innovation at an institutional level.  
The cross -disciplinary nature of some KTP projects has also helped to strengthen 
relationships withi n institutions.     
Associate benefits  
12.7 There was strong evidence to show that associates have increased their knowledge, skills 
and capabilities  from KTPs, which included technical, commercialisation and business 
related skills. For the majority, the KTP h as raised career ambitions and accelerated 
career progression  (particularly for those within industry). KTPs have positively impacted 
upon associates’ employment opportunities and their earnings  over the course of their 
career.  Many associates secured a j ob at the KTP business partner after the project ended, 
and almost all associates surveyed are now in employment in industry or academia.  
Knowledge gained through KTPs has been disseminated more widely, with examples from 
both industry and academia, altho ugh the subsequent effects on third parties could not be 
confirmed in this study.  
Additionality and contribution of KTPs  
12.8 The majority of outcomes described above were partially or (to a lesser extent) fully 
additional,  and there was strong evidence to sugg est that KTPs have made a key difference 99 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  in bringing about outcomes, often alongside other factors. For all partners surveyed, full 
deadweight was very low, indicating that very few would have achieved all the outcomes 
anyway without that support. Evidence  on the relative contribution of KTPs suggested that 
the scheme did play an important – and in some cases critical – role in generating the 
outcomes observed .  It is important to recognise that these outcomes have often been 
achieved in combination with ot her factors.  KTPs often formed part of wider business 
development plans and the businesses  often had prior experience of innovation and working 
with academia. The academics involved often had a track record of working with and/or in 
industry.  
Success fact ors 
12.9 The evidence demonstrates how the KTP model is effective in facilitating knowledge transfer 
between partners.  The three -way, industry -led partnership  and dedicated resource for 
an associate that is embedded in the business  has been key to this.  Other  key factors that 
influenced the success of KTPs included: having a strong and realistic plan at the outset, with 
alignment of goals and buy -in from all partners; close alignment between expertise and need; 
and having a well -structured project.  Within the  business, strategic fit and prioritisation of 
the KTP by the leadership team was important, alongside buy -in across other relevant teams.  
The fit, motivation, capability and calibre of the associate was “instrumental” to the success. 
Proximity between pa rtners can be helpful, but was not always necessary.  The location, 
sector of the business, and the size of the KTP grant were not significant determinants of the 
effects on business growth as a result of the KTP. This highlights their potential role acros s 
different types of business, and all places and sectors.  
Wider benefits  
12.10  The evaluation found examples that demonstrated that KTPs can contribute to 
equality, diversity and inclusion. However, the evidence also suggested that there is more to 
be done in c ontributing to widening participation, for instance with the large majority of 
associates and academics being male.  
12.11  Above and beyond the direct benefits for those involved in the KTP scheme, there was 
some evidence for potential spillovers.  This included academics sharing the knowledge 
gained through KTPs with other academics and businesses, and associates taking the skills 
and knowledge gained with them as they progressed their careers in other organisations.   
12.12  The KTP scheme has had a wide reach across t he UK . With the benefits not affected by 
region/ nation, we can conclude that the scheme has had a positive impact on business 
innovation and growth across the UK . The scheme was not designed to deliver wider local 
benefits, though there were some examples  of such effects.  These e xamples included local 
employment creation, KTP businesses contribut ing to local cluster development , and KTPs  
being used (alongside other interventions) to strengthen an area’s innovation ecosystem. The 100  
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  potential for more of these  benefits would require deliberate instigation and we return to this 
under the recommendations and lessons.    
Recommendations and lessons  
12.13  Overall, as set out above, the KTP scheme achieved significant impact over the 2010 -
2020 period, with strong evidence of outcomes for the three partners involved in line with 
the underlying programme logic. The recommendations and lessons  to consider are made in 
this context.  
Demand and reach of the scheme  
12.14  The evidence in the report has demonstrated that the demand for, a nd reach of, the 
scheme is broad.  A few  areas have been identified where this could be developed further  to 
increase access to the scheme by businesses  who are less active in relation to innovation 
and/or engagement with the knowledge base, and for project s that may be less commercially -
focused . This may require additional resources for the scheme.   
• The application process/forms and criteria were thought to be potential barriers to 
projects that have a focus on social/environmental rather than commercial ai ms. These 
should be revisited to ensure that they are aligned with potential projects in these fields.  
• The majority of businesses  were innovation -active and/or  had prior experience working  
with the knowledge base before their  KTP. The evidence also indicated that  KTPs have  
often  been used as part of a business’s wider package of development activities to  support 
growth. Two options for expanding reach to businesses that are newer to innovation 
and/or collaboration with the knowledge base  could be to:  tap into the wider business 
support landscape  to attract new applicants , including those within UKRI (e.g. EDGE) and 
those outside (e.g. linking to export support or schemes such as Help to Grow) ; and 
consider  shorter KTPs , thereby reducing the investment  required for those businesses 
new to innovation . Actions here may require additional resource for programme delivery.  
• Supporting the two previous points, communications on the potential business benefits 
and on projects with social or environmental object ives may help to broaden access.  
• A key lesson from the evaluation was the need for senior buy -in within KB institutions  to 
KTPs and  the existence of  individuals within relevant technology transfer/enterprise 
offices with the drive to promote them and make them happen. KB institutions should 
therefore engage and periodically re -engage with senior leaders, highlighting the benefits 
that KTPs can bring . 
Implementation  
12.15  The evaluation found a number of key facets that were important in supporting the 
impact of KTP projects , particularly around the partnership and the three parties involved in 101  
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  this. These provide lessons for those that are involved in instig ating, developing and 
supporting projects so that  impact can be maximised. Key areas of good practice  for 
dissemination are as follows:  
• Associate recruitment is important to ensure a suitable candidate is found. Processes that 
can support this include spee d of action upon project approval and ensuring the post is 
seen as attractive. The range of benefits to associates found in this evaluation, including 
for those wishing to pursue careers in industry, academia or at the interface of the two 
can help to prom ote these posts.  
• A KTP plan that is developed post -award, including with clear goals and shared and well -
understood ways of working, was found to be key to success. This could be a useful check 
for KTAs, and provides an important first milestone for the pa rties involved.  
• Capacity and buy -in within business was a key factor in success. A senior representative 
of the business with ownership of the KTP project help s to ensure that this is in place.  
• The institutional capacity of the knowledge base partner to su pport  the project during 
delivery  was found to be an important factor in success. KB representatives should note 
this, particularly if academic partners have less previous experience in working with 
industry, and so may require additional support.  The supp ort role provided by KB 
representatives includes taking on administrative tasks such as meeting minutes and 
claims processes.  
12.16  Finally on implementation, monitoring data to help facilitate the evaluation could 
have been better, in particular in relation to close out data and  contact information. This may 
reflect that the period subject to the study went back to 2010. That said, it is critical for 
monitoring information to be captured and maintained to enable future evaluation. A useful 
action would be to che ck, update and add secondary details for key contacts at the end of the 
KTP.  
Wider aspects  
12.17  KTPs were seen as distinctive in the innovation landscape. However, it was not clear 
how they fit or complemented other support in practice, and there was a percepti on that some 
in UKRI had a lack of understanding of the role  of KTPs . As well as the potential for tapping 
into schemes such as EDGE (see above), two other key issues should be considered:  
• Communications and profile -raising within UKRI on the role of KTPs  in their existing form 
could help encourage better  integration with other existing activities, e.g. with those of 
Research Councils. This could highlight the various routes to impacts that KTPs  can have,  
and so prompt more consideration on how they could align with other schemes. Key 
relevant routes include : increasing the application of research into industry and wider 
contexts; as a means of developing human capital for innovation, including at the 102  
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  impo rtant interface between research and industry; and to support innovation and 
growth in businesses.  
• There was some ad hoc evidence on the role of KTPs in contributing to place -based 
aspects. Whilst not part of KTP design, a key question is whether there is scope to 
maximise place -based impacts further in future.  This would need to be actively instigated 
by Innovate UK and/or by local partners, likely on a case -by-case basis.   A-1 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Annex A:  Key findings  and notes on the evidence  
A.1 This Annex sect ion sets out some of the key findings from the report, the sources of evidence 
that have been used and any notes or caveats.  
Table A-1: Key findings, sources and notes  
Finding  Source  Notes/caveats  
The m ajority of businesses 
were already innovation active 
and had experience of 
engaging with academics  Business survey , e.g. : 
• 81% of respondents had 
invested in R&D activities 
prior to KTP  
• 64% had previously 
engaged with academics 
through a range of 
mecha nisms  Business survey was 
representative of the 
population on observable 
characteristics, though was 
small in sample (86), meaning 
a margin of error on the %s of 
around 8 -10 percentage points  
The m ajority (88%) of 
business respondents had 
faced challenges  that hindered 
their engagement with 
academics prior to their KTP  The main issues were: not 
knowing about academic 
experience available (62%), 
not knowing how to access 
academics (58%), a lack of 
resources/capacity within the 
business, including finance, t o 
engage with academics (54%)  Business survey was 
representative of the 
population on observable 
characteristics, though was 
small in sample (86), meaning 
a margin of error on the %s of 
around 7 -10 percentage points  
The m ajority of the academics 
had prior  experience of 
working with businesses and 
in industry  Academic survey, e.g.:  
• 95% had worked with 
businesses before  
• 39% had collaborated with 
the KTP business before, 
and 25% knew the 
business but had not 
collaborated  
• 65% of academics had 
direct experience  of 
working in industry  Academic survey was 
representative of the 
population on observable 
characteristics, though was 
small in sample (93), meaning 
a margin of error on the %s of 
around 4-9 percentage points  
Activity additionality was 
reasonably high, wi th the 
majority of businesses and 
academics saying that projects 
would probably or definitely 
not have gone ahead anyway if 
a KTP grant had not been 
available.  67% of businesses said the 
project would definitely or 
probably not have happened 
without the KT P grant. This 
was similar to the 65% 
reporting a similar type of 
additionality in close -out 
forms.  
This figure was 75% for 
academics.  
Where it would have gone 
ahead, timing, scale, quality 
may have been compromised.  
See Table 4-3 for more info.  As above, data were from 
business and academic 
surveys, with potential 
margins of error. That said, the 
close out forms provide 
corroboration.  
Note there could be some 
attribut ion bias.  A-2 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Finding  Source  Notes/caveats  
There is good evidence that the 
KTP scheme has led to the 
intended intermediate 
outcomes set out in the 
underlying logic – for 
businesses, academics and 
associates.  This is based on the survey 
responses – with Figures 5 -1 
(businesses) , 6-1 (associates)  
and 7 -1 (academics)  setting 
out the proportions of 
respondents observing 
different benefit s to date, or 
expecting it in the future.  As above, there are margins of 
error associated with the 
surveys. For the business and 
academic surveys, the margi ns 
are higher (around 6 -10 
percentage points); for the 
associate survey, which had 
406 responses, the margins are 
lower (3 -5 percentage points).  
Note that there may also be 
some attribution bias.  
KTPs have had a positive 
statistically significant impact 
on the employment and 
turnover growth of beneficiary 
companies. This positive 
impact was significant both 
during and following the KTP. 
The effects started in the first 
year of KTPs, and were 
sustained until three years 
after the KTP has finished.  Differen ce-in-differences 
analysis supports this finding, 
with Table 9- setting out the 
coefficients and statistical 
significance. The reported 
coefficient can  be interpreted 
approximately as the net 
additional growth rate 
associated with treatment.  
 This may reflect the effects of 
KTPs in combination with 
other complementary factors. 
For instance, the fact that the 
effect  starts in the first year of 
the KTP ma y be partly 
explained by KTPs being part 
of a broader set of business 
development actions.  
KTPs were found to have no 
statistically significant effect 
on productivity as estimated 
using the ratio between 
turnover and employment.  Difference -in-differences 
analysis supports this finding, 
with Table 9- setting out the 
absence of statistical 
significance.  This is intuitive  given that we 
have seen similar levels of 
positive effect on turnover and 
employment. This does not 
mean that KTPs do not help 
productivity for some 
companies, and some 
businesses reported an effect 
on productivity in the survey.  
There was limited eviden ce to 
suggest that KTP 
characteristics or business 
characteristics affected the 
findings in relation to 
employment and turnover. 
Three  exceptions were:  
smaller companies and high  
growth potential companies  
benefited more; t hose KTPs 
finishing early had a l ower 
effect than those completing.  
This suggests that an open and 
broad approach is appropriate.  Difference -in-differences 
analysis – see Annex E.  There were some other factors 
in individual years or tests 
where a differential effect was 
seen, but these were 
inconsistently found. The two 
points made here were the key 
examples.  
The estimated net impact on 
GVA through businesses was 
£1.7bn to £2.2bn between 
2010 and 2020.  Section 11 sets out the analysis 
undertaken to reach these 
figures – drawing on  the 
econometric analysis, in The approach used  
conservative assumptions. We 
have sought to take account of 
the attribution of the effects to A-3 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Finding  Source  Notes/caveats  
particular the evidenced 
effects on turnover, which 
have been converted to GVA.  KTPs (versus other factors) by 
using the survey responses on 
‘contribution’, though this is 
not an exact science and could 
be prone to attribution bias. 
We therefore applied a high 
(80%) and low (60%) 
attribution to indicate a 
potential range.   
The overall estimate net 
impact on GVA was £ 1.7bn to 
£2.3bn between 2010 and 
2020.  Section 11 sets out the analysis 
undertaken to reach these 
figures. This is based on the 
estimated business impacts 
(row above) and impacts 
through the salaries of 
associates that were no longer 
employed at the KTP bu siness. 
The associate impacts have 
been estimated using the 
survey of associates, in 
particular their perceptions of 
how the KTP has helped with 
their earnings potential and 
the additionality associated 
with the KTP.  Note that the associate impacts 
present ed in Section 11 do not 
reflect the total associate 
impacts as they have excluded 
those associates still employed 
at the KTP business.  
Note also that the associate 
impacts are based on self -
reported perceptions and so 
could be subject to some 
attribution b ias. That said, 
these impacts make up a very 
small proportion of the total 
estimated impacts (2%).  
The overall benefit cost ratio 
was estimated to be 4.2:1 to 
5.5:1  Section 11 sets out the analysis 
undertaken. These BCRs were 
based on the overall net impa ct 
set out in the row above 
against the costs to the public 
purse and the costs to 
businesses (in terms of 
matched contributions).  The BCRs are not directly 
comparable to previous 
studies on KTPs, because we 
have incorporated the matched 
contributions by b usinesses on 
the costs side (excluded in 
previous studies), and the 
methodology for estimating 
business impacts has used the 
difference -in-differences 
approach (previous studies 
used self -reported feedback 
from businesses).  
There may be some costs that 
are excluded, e.g. additional 
costs to businesses of 
implementing a KTP, and 
additional costs to KB 
institutions (such as 
employment of KTP 
specialists). Conversely, we 
have not attempted to value 
the benefits to the knowledge 
base.  
Source: SQWB-1 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Annex B:  List of c onsultees  
Table B-1: List of internal consultees  
Name  Role  Organisation  
Narpal Sihra  KTP lead  Knowledge Transfer Network  
Jan Stringer; Ian Blakemore; 
Joel Ferguson; Philippa Ryan; 
Gerry O'Hagan; Rob Rolley; 
Gerry Black; Susan Suttle  Regional KTAs (x8)  Knowledge Transfer Network  
Natalie Crawley  KTP Manager  Welsh Government  
Scott Quinn  KTP Manager  Invest Northern Ireland  
James Box  Senior Programme Manager  NERC  
Huw Vasey  Strategic Lead for Innovation, 
Business Engagement and 
Commercialisation  ESRC  
Adam Luqmani  Joint Head of Business 
Engagement  EPSRC  
  
Table B-2: List of external consultees (*views gathered from membership)  
Name  Role  Organisation  
Hazel Juggins  KTP Manager (University of 
Northumberland) and KT 
Manager National Forum Chair  KT Manager National Forum  
Jovan Luza jic; Ed Castell  Policy Manager; Policy Analyst  Universities UK   
Annette Bramley  Director  N8 Research Partnership  
Douglas Dowell*  Policy Manager  Russell Group  
Joe Marshall; Anna Dent -
Davies  CEO; Universities Partnerships 
Manager  National Centre for 
Universities and Business  
Rachel Persad  Policy Manager  GuildHE  
John Robins; Alexandra 
Leadley  Business Development 
Manager; Skills Academy 
Manager  Compound Semiconductor 
Applications Catapult  
Mike Holmes  KTP Manager  Centre for Process Innovation  
Jack Semple*  Alliance Secretary  Manufacturing Technologies 
Association  
 
  B-2 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table B-3: List of Knowledge Base consultees  
Name  Role  Organisation  
Lorraine Marks  Head of KTP and Business 
Engagement Programmes  Queen’s University Belfast  
Alasdair Cameron  Director - West of Scotland 
KTP Centre  University of Strathclyde  
Paul Yeomans  KTP Manager  The University of Nottingham  
Sarah Durkin  KTP Development Manager  Sheffield Hallam Unive rsity  
Janet Morana  Associate Director of Research 
and Enterprise  University of Salford  
Holly Leonard  Innovation Partnerships 
Manager  University of Essex  
Anna Bullen  Partner Development 
Associate  University of Loughborough  
Alexis J. Holden  Director, Research and 
Enterprise Service  UCLAN  
Louisa Evans  KTP Officer  University of Warwick  
Stuart McKay  Senior KTP Manager  University of the West of 
Scotland  
Chris Woods  Research & Impact Support 
Officer  University of Bangor  
Ellen Parkes  KTP Manager; KTP 
Development Coordinator  University of the West of 
England (x2)  
Kamran Harandy  External Funding Manager  Falmouth University  
Arnaud Drapier  Research Development Officer 
(Business Led)  University of Leicester  
Paul Thomas  Business Manager  Cardi ff University (feedback 
received via email not 
consultation)  
 C-1 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Annex C:  Theories of Change and underpinning assumptions  
Figure C-1: Theory of Change - Businesses  
 
Source:  SQW  
C-2 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure C-2: Theory of Change – Associates  
 
Source:  SQW  
C-3 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure C-3: Theory of Change – Knowledge Base (academic partners)  
 
Source:  SQW  
C-4 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table C-1: Underpinning assumptions and factors that may enable or hinder KTP performance  
 Strategy / rationale  Delivery  Effects  
Businesses  • Businesses would not have accessed 
university expertise or alternative 
support without KTP  
• KTP projects are innovative/focused 
where they can make a strategic 
difference  • Business accepts/values knowledge  
• Business has resource/skills/capacity to 
absorb kn owledge and implement 
change  
• Business receives complementary 
support where necessary  • Benefits are tangible and sustained  
• Business accesses finance where 
necessary  
• Wider external factors, e.g. demand for 
products/services, regulatory barriers  
Associates  • KTP aligns with skills and aspirations of 
would -be associates  • KTP recruitment process is effective  
• Associate is actively embedded in 
business, and focus on KTP project  
• Associate receives effective coaching, 
mentoring and personal development, 
and wider sup port from business/KB  • The new skills/qualifications gained help 
associates to secure employment  
Knowledge 
Base  • At an institutional level, KTPs align with 
strategic priorities, and effective 
processes and sufficient capacity in place 
to generate demand, r ecruit and 
administer KTPs  
• Academics incentivised to engage with 
/develop partnerships with businesses  • Academic provides regular and 
appropriate supervision  
• Academic expertise relevant to business 
challenge, and adapted/localised to meet 
specific needs of  business  • KTP leads to further collaborative or 
consultancy projects, and/or new ways 
of engaging with businesses  
• KTP experience used to inform teaching 
and further research, which is more 
business -relevant as a result, i.e. learning 
can be applied/genera lised  
Cross -
cutting  • Clear rationale to engage with KTPs  
• Clear business case for project  
• KTP offer is attractive, with sufficient 
demand from eligible/relevant partners  
• Application process is 
proportionate/appropriate  
• Employing high -calibre graduates to 
work with business/KB is effective 
knowledge transfer mechanism  • All partner s fully committed to project, 
and have resource/time required to 
engage effectively  
• KTP interacts effectively with other 
interventions in practice (e.g. EEN/Edge 
or Catapults)  
• IP agreement clear between partners and 
facilitates commercialisation  • Partnership is strengthened and 
sustained, and becomes strategic  (not 
transactional)  
• Dissemination/knowledge exchange/ 
spillover mechanisms are present and 
effective (e.g. Associate movement, 
academics apply learning in other 
industry relationships, leading to the 
uptake of ideas by other businesses)  C-5 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   Strategy / rationale  Delivery  Effects  
• KTPs complement/do not duplicate other 
support available  
• KTP project does not replace what could 
be achie ved by using other sources of 
knowledge/advice, nor replace solutions 
that are available ‘off the shelf’  
• Outcomes/benefits for all three partners 
will not/are most unlikely to occur to the 
same extent without a KTP (i.e. there is 
additionality)  • Frequent communications and trust 
between partners, with a common 
technical/organisational ‘language’ (or 
ability to develop/learn it)  
• Shared vision between partners, and 
well -structured project plan  • Transferability/r elevance of knowledge, 
openness/capabilities to disseminate by 
business/KB  
• Local impacts – alignment between KTP 
and local specialisms/clusters/other 
local interventions  
Source: SQW  D-1 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Annex D:  Further data on surveys  
D.1 The following sections present comparisons between the characteristics of partners surveyed 
against the total  populations supported.  It also includes survey respondent’s satisfaction 
scores.  
Representativeness checks  
Business partners  
Table D-1: Size of survey sample and entire population  
  Count  % 
Total no. of survey respondents  86 5% of total population  
Total no. of beneficiary businesses  1,868    
Table D-2: Total and average grant size  
  Survey (n=103 awards as 
1 has no figure)  Total population (n=2 ,285 
awards)  
Total grant amount   £                    9,467,843   £                 209,071,858  
Average grant amount   £                          91,92 1   £                            91,49 8  
Table D-3: Region   
Survey  % Total 
population  % 
South East  10 12%  223  12%  
Scotland  10 12%  221  12%  
North West  10 12%  209  11%  
Yorkshire and the Humber  6 7% 177  9% 
West Midlands  11 13%  153  8% 
London  5 6% 137  7% 
Northern Ireland  4 5% 136  7% 
East Midlands  8 9% 133  7% 
South West  5 6% 132  7% 
North East  6 7% 124  7% 
East of England  6 7% 112  6% 
Wales  5 6% 111  6% 
Total number of businesses  86  
1,868   D-2 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table D-4: Business size  
  Survey  % Total 
population  % 
Micro  264  14%  14 16%  
Small  687  37%  29 34%  
Medium  459  25%  24 28%  
Large  457  24%  19 22%  
Unknown  1 0% 0 0% 
Total number of businesses  1,868    86   
Table D-5: Start year of KTP  
  Survey (n=103 
awards as 1 has 
no figure)  % Total 
population 
(n=2285 
awards)  % 
2010  466  20%  16 19%  
2011  198  9% 6 7% 
2012  202  9% 7 8% 
2013  299  13%  18 21%  
2014  321  14%  16 19%  
2015  291  13%  5 6% 
2016  218  10%  7 8% 
2017  191  8% 10 12%  
2018  86 4% 1 1% 
2019  13 1% 0 0% 
Total number of awards  2,285    86   
Table D-6: Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes   
Survey  % Total 
population  % 
Unknown  18 21%  694  37%  
Service  11 13%  219  12%  
Instrument/electrical man  8 9% 138  7% 
IT/multimedia  7 8% 103  6% 
Metal goods  4 5% 99 5% 
Metal manufacturing  4 5% 82 4% 
Medical  4 5% 69 4% 
Chemical manufacturing  4 5% 57 3% 
R&D  1 1% 47 3% D-3 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   
Survey  % Total 
population  % 
Plastics/paper  3 3% 46 2% 
Education/administration  2 2% 41 2% 
Energy/water  4 5% 35 2% 
Furniture/jewellery/games  2 2% 29 2% 
Food/drink  1 1% 29 2% 
Membership/Professional Orgs  0 0% 26 1% 
Construction  4 5% 25 1% 
Publishing/media/sport  1 1% 24 1% 
Agriculture/fish  1 1% 20 1% 
Sustainability  3 3% 19 1% 
Footwear/textiles  1 1% 18 1% 
Bricks/glass  1 1% 16 1% 
Transport  1 1% 15 1% 
Finance  0 0% 11 1% 
Wood  1 1% 5 0% 
Aerospace  0 0% 1 0% 
Total number of businesses  86  
1,868   
 
Associates  
Table D-7: Size of survey sample and total population   
Count  % 
Total no. of associate survey respondents  400  17% of entire population  
Total no. of associates with completed projects  2,422   
 
Table D-8: Number of project completed  
Number of 
projects 
completed  Associate survey 
respondents (n: 400)  % Total population of 
associates (n: 
2422)  % 
1 397  99%  2,402  99%  
2 3 1% 19 1% 
3 0 0% 1 0% 
Total  400   
2,422   
 D-4 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table D-9: Start year of first project completed  
Start year of first 
completed project  Associate survey 
respondents (n: 400)  % Total population of 
associates (n: 2422)  % 
2010  521  22%  68 17%  
2011  212  9% 32 8% 
2012  213  9% 38 10%  
2013  305  13%  47 12%  
2014  336  14%  50 13%  
2015  320  13%  63 16%  
2016  234  10%  45 11%  
2017  191  8% 36 9% 
2018  81 3% 19 5% 
2019  9 0% 2 1% 
Total  2,422   
400   
 
Table D-10: Duration of completed projects  
Duration of completed 
project  Associate 
survey 
respondents 
(n: 400)  % Total 
population of 
associates (n: 
2422)  % 
Less than 1 year  2 1% 11 0.5%  
1 to 2 years  43 11%  319  13%  
2 to 3 years  249  62%  1459  60%  
3 to 4 years  94 24%  541  22%  
4 to 5 years  11 3% 81 3% 
More than 5 years  1 0.3%  11 0.5%  
Total  400   
2422   
Knowledge base partners  
Table D-11: Size of survey sample and entire population   
Count  % 
Total no. of academic survey respondents  93 6% of entire population  
Total no. of academics associated with completed  projects  1,597   
 D-5 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table D-12: KB organisations covered  
  Count  % 
Total no. of KB organisations surveyed academics worked 
within  55 40% of entire population  
Total no. of KB organisations  136   
 
Table D-13: Location of KB organisation   
Total no. of 
academics 
surveyed (n:  93) % Total population of 
Knowledge Base 
organisations (n: 136)  % 
Scotland  14 15%  18 13%  
South East  16 17%  17 13%  
London  4 4% 15 11%  
Wales  3 3% 13 10%  
North West  13 14%  12 9% 
South West  7 8% 11 8% 
West Midlands  5 5% 11 8% 
East Midlands  8 9% 10 7% 
East of England  5 5% 9 7% 
Yorkshire and Humber  7 8% 8 6% 
Northern Ireland  6 6% 6 4% 
North East  5 5% 6 4% 
Total no.  93  
136   
 
Table D-14: Average number of KTP projects completed  
  Academic survey 
respondents (n: 93)  Total population of 
academics (n: 1597)  
Average no. of KTP projects completed  1.5 1.3 
 
Table D-15: Start year of first completed KTP project  
Start year of first 
project  Academic survey 
respondents (n: 
93) % Total population of 
academics (n: 1 ,597)  % 
2010  17 18%  402  25%  
2011  9 10%  162  10%  
2012  11 12%  142  9% 
2013  18 19%  210  13%  
2014  10 11%  192  12%  D-6 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Start year of first 
project  Academic survey 
respondents (n: 
93) % Total population of 
academics (n: 1 ,597)  % 
2015  11 12%  187  12%  
2016  9 10%  129  8% 
2017  8 9% 124  8% 
2018  0 0% 41 3% 
2019  0 0% 8 1% 
Total no.  93  
1,597   
 
 
Satisfaction scores  
Business partners  
Table D-16: Business survey (n: 86): How effective do you think the following aspects 
of the set up of the KTP project(s) were on a scale of 1 (very ineffective) to 5 (very 
effective)?   
1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5  % DK % 
Support from your KTP 
Advisor/KTA  2 2 4 5 8 9 25 29 45 52 2 2 
Interaction with 
knowledge base during the 
development of the project  2 2 6 7 15 17 23 27 38 44 2 2 
Forming the KTP 
partnership(s)  0 0 2 2 6 7 42 49 34 40 2 2 
Finding and recruiting an 
appropriate Associate(s)  5 6 6 7 16 19 27 32 30 35 6 1 
Developing the KTP 
project(s)  2 2 4 5 13 15 40 47 26 30 1 1 
 
Table D-17: Business survey (n: 86): How effective do you think the following aspects 
of project implementation were on a scale of 1 (very ineffective ), and 5 (very 
effective )?  
1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % DK % 
Clear IP agreement 
between business and the 
knowledge base  2 2 2 2 9 11 23 27 44 52 5 6 
Value of academic team’s 
knowledge in relation to 
the project  2 2 9 10 5 6 27 31 43 50 0 0 D-7 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   
1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % DK % 
Shared vision for the 
project amongst partners  1 1 3 3 14 16 27 31 41 48 0 0 
Capabilities of the 
associate  7 8 1 1 12 14 27 31 39 45 0 0% 
Interaction with the 
knowledge base post 
award  5 6 3 3 21 24 23 27 31 36 3 3 
Delivery of activities in line 
with a project plan  4 5 6 7 14 16 37 43 25 29 0 0 
Support from non -
academic staff from the 
knowledge base 
organisation  5 6 7 8 17 20 24 28 23 27 10 11 
 
Associates  
Table D-18: Associate survey (n: 400): How satisfied were you on a scale of 1 (very 
unsatisfied) to 5 (very satisfied) with the following aspects of the KTP programme?   
1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % DK % 
Training provided 
from Ashorne Hill  9 2 13 3 26 7 83 21 251  63 18 5 
Support from the 
KTP Advisor/KTA  8 2 24 6 46 12 109  27 210  53 3 1 
The recruitment and 
induction process 
for you onto the KTP  4 1 8 2 43 11 130  33 209  52 6 2 
Monitoring 
requirements for 
the KTP  11 3 19 5 70 18 142  36 152  38 6 2 
 
Table D-19: Associate survey (n: 400): How effective do you think the following 
aspects of project implementation were on a scale from 1 (very ineffective) to 5 (very 
effective)   
1  % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5  % DK % 
Support from 
academic staff 
from the 
knowledge base 
organisation  9 2 30 8 54 14 109  27 196  49 2 1 
Support from the 
business  23 6 31 8 67 17 107  27 171  43 1 0 D-8 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   
1  % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5  % DK % 
Value of academic 
team’s knowledge 
in relation to the 
project  15 4 27 7 57 14 131  33 168  42 2 1 
Interaction with 
the knowledge 
base post award  38 10 30 8 79 20 86 22 136  34 30 8 
Support from non -
academic staff 
from the 
knowledge base 
organisation  14 4 26 7 76 19 122  31 129  32 31 8 
Delivery of 
activities in line 
with a project plan  13 3 33 8 87 22 147  37 117  29 3 1 
Shared vision for 
the project 
amongst partners  26 7 41 10 80 20 136  34 113  28 4 1 
 
Knowledge base partners  
Table D-20: Academic survey (n: 93): How satisfied are you with the following aspects 
of the KTP programme from a scale of 1 (very unsatisfied) to 5 (very satisfied)?   
1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % DK % 
Support from 
your KTP 
Advisor/KTA  1 1 2 2 6 6 19 20 65 70 0 0 
Approval 
process  0 0 1 1 8 9 35 38 42 45 7 8 
Ease of forming 
the KTP 
partnership  0 0 3 3 9 10 43 46 35 38 3 3 
Monitoring 
requirements  0 0 5 5 10 11 42 45 35 38 1 1 
Application 
processes  0 0 3 3 13 14 38 41 34 37 5 5 
Associate 
recruitment 
process  0 0 5 5 17 18 40 43 28 30 3 30 
Marketing and 
promotion of 
KTPs  1 1 10 11 29 31 32 34 12 13 9 10 
 D-9 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Table D-21: Academic survey (n: 93): How satisfied are you with the following aspects 
of project implementation on a scale of 1 (very unsatisfied) to 5 (very satisfied)?   
1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % DK % 
Partner 
commitment to the 
project  2 2 2 2 10 24 22 24 57 61 0 0 
Shared vision for 
the project amongst 
partners  1 1 3 3 10 33 31 33 47 51 1 1 
Well -structured 
project plan  1 1 2 2 8 42 39 42 43 46 0 0 
Clear IP agreement  1 1 2 2 15 32 30 32 41 44 4 4 
 E-1 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Annex E:  Detailed methodology  
Detail on Propensity Score Matching  
E.1 Figure E -1 shows the estimated “propensity scores”, i.e. the estimated probability for a 
business  to be a KTP beneficiary  based on their observable characteristics before the KTP was 
undertaken. The portion in red at the top shows the distribution of actual KTP businesses and 
the portion in dark grey below shows the distribution of the unmatched sample of potential 
comparison businesses. The graph clearly shows that the unmatched group of businesses h as 
a much higher concentration around low propensity scores and that the overall distribution 
looks very dissimilar to the distribution of KTP businesses.  
Figure E-1: Unmatched sample distribution of “p robability to do a KTP”  
 
Source: SQW analysis  
E.2 Using the estimated propensity scores, we matched each KTP beneficiary to the non -
beneficiary with the closest propensity score. Figure E-2 shows the distribution of propensity 
scores for KTP beneficiaries and the matc hed sample of non -beneficiaries.  
E-2 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Figure E-2: Matched sample distribution of “probability to do a KTP”  
Source: SQW analysis  
E.3 The graph shows that the matching was successful in reducing bias in observab le 
characteristics of the distribution of KTP businesses against the wider business population. 
This was reaffirmed through tests of sampling bias between the treatment and comparison 
group presented in Table E-1 below : 
Table E-1: Results from matched and unmatched sample tests  
Variable  Unmatched 
sample  Mean  
Treated  Mean  
Control  % bias  
Treated v Control  T test  
Treated v Control  
 Matched  Treated  Control  % bias  |%↓ bias|  t p>|t|  
Credit rating  U 65.251  55.551  31.3   12.41  .000***  
M 65.251  64.189  3.4 89.1  .93 .352  
Status company  U .938  .973  -16.6   -7.22  .000***  
M .938  .935  1.5 91.2  0.36  .721  
Business age         
Young  U .089  .292  -53.5   -17.56  .000***  
M .089  .087  0.5 99.1  .18 .854  
Old U .634  .358  57.4   21.53  .000***  
M .634  .638  -0.8 98.7  -.22 .829  
Pre KTP size         
Micro  U .251  .369  -25.7   -9.27  .000***  
M .251  .250  0.1 99.5  .04 .968  
Medium  U .192  .053  43.2   20.07  .000***  
M .192  .160  9.8 77.3  2.37  .018**  
E-3 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation  Variable  Unmatched 
sample  Mean  
Treated  Mean  
Control  % bias  
Treated v Control  T test  
Treated v Control  
 Matched  Treated  Control  % bias  |%↓ bias|  t p>|t|  
Large  U .107  .023  34.7   17.19  .000***  
M .107  .096  4.5 87.1  1.04  .300  
BH tracking         
Not tracked  U .754  .755  -0.3  -.11 .916  
M .754  .737  3.9 -1299  1.12  .264  
Tracked  U .180  .174  1.5  .57 .571  
M .180  .195  -4.1 -172.5  -1.16  .248  
Sector         
Construction  U .033  .118  -32.7   -10.47  .000***  
M .033  .034  -0.7 97.9  -0.29  0.772  
Financial, 
insurance, or 
real estate  U .028  .094  -27.7   -8.9 .000***  
M .028  .024  2.0 92.7  0.87  .382  
Manufacturing  U .370  .113  62.8   27.6  .000***  
M .370  .324  11.2  82.1  2.78  .006***  
Transport & 
storage  U .007  .024  -14.0   -4.45  .000***  
M .007  .007  0.0 100.0  -0.00  1.000  
Source: SQW analysis of ONS data  
Table E-2: DiD analysis of impacts of KTP support by business size  
 (1)  
Ln(employment)  (2)  
Ln(real turnover)  (3)  
Productivity  
Medium and large companies only (100+ employees)  
KTP 1st year  0.0783***  
(4.20)  0.0768**  
(2.46)  -49.05**  
(-2.04)  
KTP 2nd year  0.103***  
(4.57)  0.0893**  
(2.41)  -67.66*  
(-1.95)  
KTP 3rd year  0.121***  
(4.68)  0.152***  
(3.71)  -52.08*  
(-1.76)  
Post KTP 1st year  0.102***  
(3.91)  0.108***  
(2.82)  -28.86  
(-1.48)  
Post KTP 2nd year  0.102***  
(3.28)  0.0960**  
(2.06)  -35.44  
(-1.41)  
Post KTP 3rd year  0.0610*  
(1.75)  0.0631  
(1.31)  -33.27  
(-1.20)  
Micro and small companies (<100 employees) - additional growth  
KTP 1st year  0.00596  
(0.23)  0.0287  
(0.66)  14.18  
(0.34)  E-4 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   (1)  
Ln(employment)  (2)  
Ln(real turnover)  (3)  
Productivity  
KTP 2nd year  0.0737**  
(2.40)  0.0861*  
(1.75)  355.4  
(1.14)  
KTP 3rd year  0.0989***  
(2.92)  0.0697  
(1.29)  401.6  
(1.07)  
Post KTP 1st year  0.105***  
(3.18)  0.0782  
(1.57)  -164.3  
(-0.92)  
Post KTP 2nd year  0.0371  
(0.98)  0.0395  
(0.71)  -197.6  
(-0.92)  
Post KTP 3rd year  0.0268  
(0.67)  0.00995  
(0.17)  -246.2  
(-0.96)  
Group trends  
Medium & large 
companies  -0.0434***  
(-6.80)  -0.0366***  
(-4.21)  16.57  
(0.85)  
Micro & small 
companies  0.0420***  
(8.76)  0.0331***  
(5.19)  -19.63  
(-1.05)  
t statistics in parentheses  
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p <  0.01  
All regressions include time and business fixed effects and cluster -robust standard errors  
Source: SQW analysis  
Table E-3: Within sample regressions  
 Ln(employment)  Ln(turnover)  
 1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  
KTP characteristics  
Second or Third 
KTP  0.0285  
(0.66)  0.0511  
(1.05)  0.0627  
(1.15)  0.133**  
(2.00)  0.0842  
(1.08)  0.126  
(1.48)  
KTP finished 
early (W3)  -0.0912**  
(-2.15)  -0.130**  
(-2.26)  -0.154**  
(-2.38)  0.117  
(1.51)  -0.0411  
(-0.45)  -0.0480  
(-0.48)  
Ln(grant value)  0.0256  
(0.53)  0.0331  
(0.46)  0.0745  
(0.92)  -0.0136  
(-0.14)  -0.0399  
(-0.35)  0.0780  
(0.62)  
Length of project 
(months)  -0.00211  
(-1.02)  -0.00106  
(-0.33)  -0.00193  
(-0.54)  0.0128***  
(3.01)  0.00878*  
(1.73)  0.00631  
(1.13)  
Ln(distance 
between KB and 
business)  -0.0184*  
(-1.69)  -0.0181  
(-1.51)  -0.0145  
(-1.08)  -0.00444  
(-0.27)  -0.00940  
(-0.49)  -0.0215  
(-1.03)  
KB partner institution characteristics  
Russell group  0.0500  
(1.17)  0.0180  
(0.39)  0.00513  
(0.10)  -0.0907  
(-1.45)  -0.0522  
(-0.71)  -0.0573  
(-0.73)  E-5 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   Ln(employment)  Ln(turnover)  
 1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  
University 
Alliance  -0.00273  
(-0.06)  0.0126  
(0.22)  -0.0669  
(-1.05)  0.0671  
(0.86)  0.0960  
(1.05)  0.0950  
(0.96)  
Million Plus  -0.0362  
(-0.72)  -0.00664  
(-0.10)  -0.0635  
(-0.87)  0.0493  
(0.55)  0.0850  
(0.81)  0.108  
(0.95)  
Guild HE  0.0342  
(0.32)  -0.0212  
(-0.11)  0.0498  
(0.23)  0.165  
(0.62)  0.0850  
(0.27)  0.145  
(0.44)  
Post 92 Poly  0.000358  
(0.01)  -0.0301  
(-0.58)  0.000600  
(0.01)  0.00605  
(0.09)  0.0190  
(0.23)  -0.0172  
(-0.19)  
Business characteristics  
Status is 
company  0.0706  
(1.34)  0.0920  
(1.10)  0.0966  
(1.04)  0.0811  
(0.71)  0.121  
(0.91)  0.137  
(0.95)  
Beahurst tracked  -0.123  
(-1.64)  -0.157**  
(-2.14)  -0.221***  
(-2.70)  -0.108  
(-1.09)  -0.113  
(-0.98)  -0.195  
(-1.53)  
Beauhurst not 
tracked  -0.149**  
(-2.19)  -0.216***  
(-3.21)  -0.296***  
(-3.95)  -0.101  
(-1.10)  -0.237**  
(-2.22)  -0.251**  
(-2.16)  
Business age in 
2020  -0.00346**  
(-2.50)  -0.00416*  
(-1.68)  -0.00340  
(-1.25)  -0.00220  
(-0.65)  -0.00282  
(-0.71)  -0.00236  
(-0.56)  
Business age in 
2020 is young  0.278*  
(1.88)  0.402***  
(3.49)  0.317**  
(2.41)  -0.0841  
(-0.54)  0.194  
(1.06)  -0.132  
(-0.65)  
Business age in 
2020 is middle  0.0368  
(0.82)  0.0491  
(0.86)  0.103  
(1.62)  0.0555  
(0.71)  0.0890  
(0.97)  0.142  
(1.44)  
Number of 
grants received  -0.000961  
(-0.40)  0.000153  
(0.05)  0.00274  
(0.85)  -0.00114  
(-0.29)  0.0000399  
(0.01)  0.000693  
(0.14)  
Business size before KTP  
Micro  0.0104  
(0.09)  0.00982  
(0.12)  -0.118  
(-1.25)  -0.0749  
(-0.67)  -0.0667  
(-0.51)  -0.381***  
(-2.62)  
Small  -0.0913  
(-0.83)  -0.118  
(-1.35)  -0.283***  
(-2.84)  -0.165  
(-1.39)  -0.160  
(-1.15)  -0.470***  
(-3.04)  
Medium  -0.153  
(-1.40)  -0.184*  
(-1.93)  -0.362***  
(-3.33)  -0.219*  
(-1.69)  -0.196  
(-1.30)  -0.513***  
(-3.04)  
Large  -0.0963  
(-0.87)  -0.113  
(-1.04)  -0.245**  
(-1.99)  -0.137  
(-0.94)  -0.0976  
(-0.57)  -0.437**  
(-2.29)  
Region  
East of England  -0.0171  
(-0.34)  -0.0113  
(-0.13)  -0.0302  
(-0.32)  0.000258  
(0.00)  0.0361  
(0.27)  0.160  
(1.09)  
London  0.110  
(1.50)  0.133  
(1.64)  0.0952  
(1.07)  0.0517  
(0.47)  0.0770  
(0.60)  0.126  
(0.91)  E-6 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   Ln(employment)  Ln(turnover)  
 1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  
North East 
England  -0.0218  
(-0.24)  0.0411  
(0.43)  0.0511  
(0.48)  -0.0540  
(-0.42)  -0.0327  
(-0.22)  0.0988  
(0.60)  
North West 
England  0.0418  
(0.71)  0.0186  
(0.24)  -0.0374  
(-0.43)  0.0626  
(0.58)  0.0963  
(0.77)  0.167  
(1.24)  
Scotland  0.118*  
(1.85)  0.131*  
(1.71)  0.181**  
(2.14)  0.00947  
(0.09)  -0.0810  
(-0.67)  -0.0164  
(-0.12)  
South East 
England  0.0502  
(0.93)  0.0822  
(1.10)  0.0823  
(1.00)  0.0425  
(0.42)  0.0544  
(0.46)  0.181  
(1.42)  
South West 
England  0.0589  
(0.96)  0.0555  
(0.66)  0.0498  
(0.53)  0.0604  
(0.52)  -0.0202  
(-0.15)  0.106  
(0.72)  
Wales  0.0599  
(0.58)  0.0605  
(0.64)  0.105  
(1.00)  0.136  
(1.05)  0.198  
(1.31)  0.248  
(1.53)  
West Midlands  0.0356  
(0.67)  0.0420  
(0.50)  0.0961  
(1.04)  -0.0526  
(-0.46)  0.0516  
(0.39)  0.152  
(1.05)  
Yorkshire and 
the Humber  -0.0106  
(-0.17)  -0.0335  
(-0.39)  -0.0448  
(-0.48)  -0.0395  
(-0.34)  -0.0919  
(-0.68)  -0.00991  
(-0.07)  
KTP department code  
BIO -0.0270  
(-0.34)  -0.0335  
(-0.39)  -0.0448  
(-0.48)  -0.268*  
(-1.89)  -0.455***  
(-2.69)  -0.808***  
(-4.44)  
CEM  0.0629  
(0.72)  -0.0375  
(-0.36)  -0.0833  
(-0.72)  0.213  
(1.28)  0.158  
(0.81)  0.0692  
(0.33)  
CHE  0.110  
(1.13)  0.214**  
(2.03)  0.202*  
(1.75)  0.118  
(0.83)  -0.00759  
(-0.05)  0.00939  
(0.05)  
COS  0.0821  
(1.37)  0.131**  
(2.00)  0.135*  
(1.84)  0.0849  
(0.96)  0.170  
(1.63)  0.136  
(1.19)  
CVE  0.00120  
(0.01)  0.0236  
(0.25)  -0.0661  
(-0.62)  -0.105  
(-0.80)  -0.0465  
(-0.30)  -0.150  
(-0.91)  
DES  0.00368  
(0.04)  0.0330  
(0.32)  0.0119  
(0.10)  0.135  
(0.94)  0.197  
(1.18)  0.220  
(1.23)  
ELE  0.0378  
(0.50)  0.0545  
(0.62)  0.00929  
(0.10)  0.178  
(1.49)  0.137  
(0.98)  0.0699  
(0.47)  
ENG  0.0639  
(1.13)  0.100  
(1.54)  0.0451  
(0.62)  0.0875  
(0.99)  0.0975  
(0.95)  -0.0417  
(-0.37)  
MAF  0.177  
(1.12)  0.125  
(0.89)  0.0144  
(0.09)  -0.0309  
(-0.16)  -0.0346  
(-0.15)  -0.196  
(-0.79)  
MAN  -0.00281  
(-0.04)  0.0375  
(0.47)  -0.0554  
(-0.63)  -0.0335  
(-0.31)  -0.110  
(-0.87)  -0.228*  
(-1.66)  
MAT  0.0594  0.164  0.109  -0.156  0.0697  -0.00845  E-7 
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships Evaluation   Ln(employment)  Ln(turnover)  
 1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  1st Year 
post – 
year 
before  2nd Year 
post – 
year 
before  3rd Year 
post – 
year 
before  
(0.41)  (1.64)  (0.99)  (-1.15)  (0.44)  (-0.05)  
MED  0.0653  
(0.93)  0.0750  
(0.79)  0.0733  
(0.70)  0.209  
(1.62)  0.139  
(0.92)  0.0949  
(0.59)  
MHS  0.0410  
(0.40)  0.0995  
(0.81)  0.00521  
(0.04)  0.135  
(0.81)  0.113  
(0.58)  -0.128  
(-0.61)  
MPE  0.0579  
(0.83)  0.0867  
(1.04)  0.0585  
(0.62)  0.107  
(0.94)  0.0880  
(0.66)  0.0399  
(0.27)  
PHY  0.0480  
(0.39)  0.0999  
(0.69)  -0.0881  
(-0.54)  0.440**  
(2.24)  0.506**  
(2.21)  0.203  
(0.81)  
Observations  1075  1068  1019  1069  1062  1013  
Degrees of 
freedom  46 46 46 46 46 46 
t statistics in parentheses  
* p < 0.1, ** p <  0.05, *** p < 0.01  
Source: SQW analysis 
  
 
Contact  
For more information:  
Jonathan Cook  
Director, SQW  
T: +44 (0) 20 7391 4105  
E: jcook @sqw.co.uk  
2nd Floor, 14 -15 Mandela Street  
London  
NW1 0DU  
 About us  
SQW Group  
SQW and Oxford Innovation are part of SQW Group.  
www.sqwgroup.com  
SQW  
SQW is a leading provider of research, analysis and advice 
on sustainable economic and social development for public, 
private and voluntary sector organisations across the UK 
and internation ally. Core services include appraisal, 
economic impact assessment, and evaluation; demand 
assessment, feasibility and business planning; economic, 
social and environmental research and analysis; 
organisation and partnership development; policy 
development,  strategy, and action planning.  In 2019, BBP 
Regeneration became part of SQW, bringing to the business 
a RICS -accredited land and property team.  
www.sqw.co.uk  
Oxford Innovation  
Oxford Innovation is a leading operator of business and 
innovation centres that  provide office and laboratory space 
to companies throughout the UK. The company also 
provides innovation services to entrepreneurs, including 
business planning advice, coaching and mentoring. Oxford 
Innovation also manages investment networks that link 
investors with entrepreneurs seeking funding from £20,000 
to £2m.  
www.oxin.co.uk  www.sqw.co.uk  
