Net Zero Review 2023Scaling Climate Technology02Net Zero Review 2023
Net zero is an investment opportunity that can only be realised
through a step change in the mobilisation of climate tech capital.
To do this Innovate UK is:
De-risking net zero 
technology across all sectors 
of the economySupporting businesses
 and projects across the UKMaking climate tech 
opportunities visible and compelling 
to the ﬁ  nance community 03Mike Biddle
Executive Director, Net Zero
Foreword
At Innovate UK our vision is for the 
UK to prosper from being the fastest transitioning economy to net zero. Prospering means creating net zero products and services, green jobs, sustainable growth and exports to help other countries reach net zero too. 
We’re helping build our future economy 
across the UK - in towns, cities and regions - by inspiring, involving and investing in UK business innovation.
Through the Building a Green Future 
programme, we work together across UKRI to support research and innovation that will unlock the solutions we need to achieve net zero in the UK by 2050.  
Innovate UK is here to build on the UK’s 
scientiﬁ  c strengths and accelerate business-led innovation, to grow a bigger, more productive data-driven economy that is net zero, with higher levels of health and wellbeing, and access to opportunitiesfor all.As well as the climate tech that will change our future and help us achieve net zero, we are also supporting the transition through systems thinking and ﬁ  nance.
From a systems perspective, it’s about 
how all the elements ﬁ  t together and stimulating demand – it can’t just be about the supply side, or technology push. For example, our Net Zero Living programme inspires towns, cities and communities to remove the barriers to adoption, creating demand for new net zero technologies. 
Furthermore, we need a step change in 
the mobilisation of capital towards the delivery of climate tech. We are making the opportunity visible and compelling to the ﬁ  nance community, showcasing how investors can prosper from the transition to net zero. Innovation may get us the prototype and the ﬁ  rst of a kind, but we need to roll out solutions at scale, in the tens, hundreds, thousands and beyond.Signiﬁ  cant investment will be required. This year’s annual review showcases companies we work with and the levels of investment they have achieved. Here we celebrate the successes so far, but most importantly we want to inspire further and bigger investment in achieving our net zero future. 
Mike Biddle
Executive Director
Net Zero
“Investors can prosper from the 
transition to net zero”Net Zero Review 2023p00
 p00
p00
p00
 Contents
The aim of this year’s annual review 
is to showcase the private investment opportunity in climate tech. Innovate UK currently delivers one of the largest climate tech funds with opportunities for investors to provide follow on scale-up funding. The following pages provide a window into our activities across our ﬁ  ve core climate tech verticals: Agriculture and Food, Heat, Make and Use, Mobility and Power. It covers:
• Market data and key stats : building 
on the work we do to target our 
own investments
• Dealﬂ  ow : demonstrating how 
companies we support successfully secure onward investment, highlighting selected examples
• Pipeline : highlighting selected 
companies receiving Innovate UK grants this year
• Focus areas : summarising 
where we are currently focusing our investments.
We’ve also included a section on how we’re catalysing investment in place-based projects.Innovate
UK
p05Agriculture and Food
p08Heat
p12Makeand UseMobility
Power Decarbonising PlacesInvest forimpact
p2805Net Zero Review 2023
Innovate
UK
In 2022/23 Innovate UK awarded 1,043  net zero-
related grants and supported 1,746  companies, 
committing over £720 million to net zero research 
and innovation projects across the United Kingdom1. The year in numbers
£400m
Mobility£144m
Make and Use
£32m
Systems Approach£28m
Agriculture and Food
£117m
Heat and PowerInnovate UK’s 
fi  ve-year impact
In 2023, we are focusing on scaling climate 
technology, which places an emphasis on small and medium-sized businesses (SMEs). SMEs awarded a Net Zero Research and Innovation grant from Innovate UK since 2018 have: 
13,000 jobs
£4.7bnof private 
investment
£4.5bnworth of goods and services 
2 Created
Raised
Exported06Net Zero Review 2023
Innovate
UK
We are a UK-wide organisation. From funding and support services to 
facility and technology access. This selection of projects highlights innovations we have supported in every UK region. 
SCOTLAND
● Hydrogen/electric powertrain 
development at HV Systems
● Upscaling tidal energy production at 
Nova Innovation
● Developing sustainable insecticides at 
Solasta Bio
NORTHERN IRELAND
● UK Smart Factory Innovation Hub at the 
University of Ulster 
● Scale-up of technology for low-emission 
concrete at Material Evolution
● Hydrogen combustion engines at 
Causeway Aero
NORTH EAST
● Network of PEMD Centres of Excellence 
at Newcastle University
● Magnet recycling plant at Seren 
Technologies
● Offshore charging system at MJR 
Controls
NORTH WEST
● Automated solutions for circular 
construction at the University of 
Manchester
● Production of carbon-neutral lithium in 
the UK at Watercycle Technologies
● Converting industrial waste gases into 
sustainable materials for consumer products at BASFYORKSHIRE AND THE HUMBER
● Material Innovation for Sustainable and 
Efﬁ  cient Use of Resources at Glass Futures
● Scale-up of power controller production 
at Magtec
● Modelling circular economy 
construction value chains at the University of Shefﬁ  eld
WALES
● Improving recycled steel puriﬁ  cation at 
Swansea University
● Battery enclosure materials automation 
at Cytec Engineering 
● Developing biodegradable packaging at 
Transcend Packaging
WEST MIDLANDS
● UK Battery Industrialisation Centre
● Sustainable critical raw material supply 
chains at the University of Birmingham
● Increased efﬁ  ciency, reliability and 
sustainability of automotive batteries at Jaguar Land Rover
EAST MIDLANDS
●Tillage enhancements for sustainable potato farming at Grimme UK
● Recyclable wind turbine blades at Hive 
Composites
● Enhanced electric motorcycle 
performance and range at Norton MotorcycleEAST OF ENGLAND
● Ultra-fast battery charging technology at 
Nyobolt
● Air Mobility Ecosytem Consortium at 
Skyports Infrastructure
● Plant-based biodegradable pellets to 
replace plastic at Xampla
LONDON
● Hydrogen engine architecture at Rolls-
Royce
● Low carbon cement from waste glass at 
Carbon Upcycling
● Development of Ultra High Power Cells 
at AMTE Power
SOUTH EAST
● Solid-state batteries at Ilika 
Technologies
● Silicon technology advanced reactor 
scale-up at Nexeon
● Supply chain innovation engineering at 
McClaren Applied
SOUTH WEST
● Enhanced batteries for aviation at 
Vertical Aerospace
● Electric motor manufacturing at 
Electriﬁ  ed Automation
● UK lithium extraction at British LithiumWorking across the UK
07Net Zero Review 2023
Innovate
UK
07
Accelerating climate 
tech investment
Climate tech ecosystem 
Innovate UK is working to build the 
investment pathways needed to scale new climate tech businesses and technologies. Connect with our Investor Communities  team to ﬁ  nd out more 
about what we do and engage in the following activities.
Innovate UK is using its convening power 
to build capacity and connections across the climate tech ﬁ  nance ecosystem. We are doing this through:
•Investment analysis: curating in-depth, 
sector-focused analysis in all net zero 
verticals. Building a detailed picture of the investment gaps, speciﬁ  c barriers and opportunities while making visible our funding pipeline.
• Capital to climate events: 
disseminating insights from our investment analysis and convening the investor community to build knowledge of climate technologies and business models, bringing in new investors and building connections across the capital stack.
• Showcasing series: highlighting curated opportunities to targeted investors to build deal ﬂ  ow.
We work with market leading partners, including Cleantech Group, Sightline Climate, Carbon Limiting Technologies, Dealroom and Climate Connection.Greening Global Finance
We are working across UKRI to establish climate and environmental risk analytics capabilities in the UK, develop responsible data approaches for ESG reporting in the ﬁ  nancial sector and integration of nature positive solutions in ﬁ  nancial decision making.
Investor Partnership Programme
Investor Partnerships are a unique opportunity for high-growth, innovative UK companies to access the funding they need to thrive and succeed. Innovate UK has and continues to partner with a diverse group of credible investor partners, including venture capital funds, corporate investors, business angel groups, and social impact investors from the UK, Europe and the US. These investors are committed to supporting innovative companies and providing the ﬁ  nancing they need to grow and scale.
Stimulating market demand
Market demand is a systemic challenge in net zero. Innovate UK is piloting new ways of supporting companies we fund through Demand Led Innovation. We are working with the First Movers Coalition and leading corporates to get advanced market commitments in place, pulling through investment and accelerating scale out. Diversity and inclusion investment readiness package of support
Innovate UK is establishing a tailored investment readiness package to unlock the potential 
of diverse talent. The purpose of the package of support is to level the playing ﬁ  eld for all innovators, equipping participants with the knowledge and understanding to navigate the private investment journey.
Beginning this year, Innovate UK will deliver bespoke investment readiness support for up to 
300 innovators from across backgrounds. Until March 2025, Innovate UK will help support these innovators’ understanding of attracting private investment and helping them grow their businesses through other routes.Net Zero Review 202308Net Zero Review 2023Agriculture 
and Food
The projected value of the global alternative protein market in 2027
The UK food and drink sector’s annual turnover, 
with an industry output of £33 billion
Data science will help farmers to use water, 
fertilisers, chemicals and fuel more efﬁ  ciently
6
Vertical farms will help the UK boost agricultural productivity, sustainability and crop resilience$155 bn
£128 bn
Making the agri-food sector 
more productive and sustainable while reducing emissions and food waste can help the UK achieve its climate goals. 
The agri-food sector is vital to the 
health and wellbeing of society, providing us with a resilient and safe supply of food. Agriculture covers 71% of UK land
3, signiﬁ  cantly shaping the 
environments we live in and with 4.3 million workers employed across the farm-to-fork food chain, it represents the biggest employment sector in the UK. 
Including imports, the entire food 
system is responsible for 35% of the UK’s total greenhouse gas emissions
4. 
Between 2015 and 2021 there was a 12% reduction in emissions associated with food and drink consumption
5 with most of these 
reductions seen beyond the farmgate, while emissions from agriculture remained largely static. Controlling the release of emissions across the food system will be critical to realising our net zero commitments.Agriculture
and Food09Net Zero Review 2023Agriculture 
and Food
Innovate UK funded companies go on to raise signifi  cant 
private investment*
Private investment
raised
£66 millionIntelligent Growth Solutions (IGS) develops technology where products are grown in vertical towers in which the environment can 
be automatically controlled and data is fed to a platform for analysis. Innovate UK awarded IGS grants to develop environment monitoring and control systems for vertical farms.
£38 millionHectare provides an online marketplace for farmers to trade livestock and grain through two websites, Sell My Livestock and Graindex. In 2019 Innovate UK awarded Hectare a grant to increase efﬁ  ciency in the UK beef farming sector, aiming to reduce the environmental impact.
£28 millionUncommon produces cell-based meat. In 2021 Innovate UK funded a project led by Uncommon to develop the UK’s ﬁ  rst pilot plant for cultivated meat.
£26 millionVertical Future develops technologies designed to facilitate vertical farming, as well as offering consultancy services and operational support. Since 2020 Innovate UK has awarded the company ﬁ  ve grants to develop technology for monitoring, environmental control and yield increases in vertical farming.
£24 millionRoslin Technologies utilises biotechnology to develop sustainable food products, to combat the issues of food security, animal health and environmental change. Innovate UK awarded the company grants to develop cultivated meat and sustainable protein technologies.
*Total private investment in companies receiving Innovate UK grants since 2018, selected examples.
10Net Zero Review 2023Agriculture 
and Food
ANIMAL HEALTH AND WELFARE
PRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY AND SUSTAINABLE PROTEINSDIGITAL SOLUTIONS FOR SUSTAINABILITY
SUSTAINABLE PEST MANAGEMENT
RESILIENT SUPPL Y CHAINS AND COLLABORATIVE NETWORKS
* Selected organisations receiving Innovate UK grants in FY 2022/23.Innovate UK is funding companies across the value chain*11Net Zero Review 2023Agriculture 
and Food
To reach net zero by 2050 there needs to be a 64% reduction 
in emissions from agriculture and land use. For many sectors there is a signiﬁ  cant gap between this target and what is possible with existing technologies; for example, in livestock it is estimated that existing technologies can only deliver a 24% reduction. 
Innovate UK will support innovations that:• enable existing agricultural systems to be more productive 
while contributing to net zero targets, increasing 
sustainability and supporting biodiversity;
• enable novel, low-emission, sustainable and resilient food 
production systems that are more efﬁ  cient such as vertical farming, which offers radical new solutions that complement more traditional farming systems and hold signiﬁ  cant potential to provide growth for UK companies;
• ensure better food for all, including plant-based and 
alternative proteins for healthier and more sustainable diets and preservation, packaging and storage technologies to reduce food waste.
Developing new solutions to reduce emissions is only the ﬁ  rst step. If they are to help us reach net zero then they must be widely adopted. Innovate UK will work with stakeholders, including Defra, to accelerate the adoption of new solutions in agriculture and horticulture.
Farming Innovation Programme
Since 2019, UKRI has invested almost £68 million through the Transforming Food Production (TFP) programme to help UK agriculture achieve net zero. Momentum generated through TFP has continued through the Farming Innovation Programme (FIP), a £210 million partnership between Defra and UKRI. FIP’s goal is to make farming more efﬁ  cient and productive through investment in research and development. The programme will support projects to transform productivity and enhance environmental sustainability in England. Its aims are to: 
• help farmers, growers and foresters increase productivity, 
sustainability and resilience;
• reduce the environmental impact of agriculture and 
horticulture; 
• apply agricultural research to provide real beneﬁ  ts to 
farmers, growers and foresters; 
• use science to develop solutions for the practical 
challenges of agriculture and horticulture.
Agri-Tech Africa Catalyst
Ofﬁ  cial development assistance was delivered through an Agri-Tech Africa Catalyst, supporting projects like Innovative Solar Energy Technology for Kenyan Tea Industry, which is reducing the use of ﬁ  rewood in the drying stage of tea processing by using alternative energy sources. 
Novel Low Emission Food Production Systems
The Novel Low Emission Food Production Systems competition has supported a range of innovative technologies from subsectors such as vertical farming and alternative proteins. The programme is co-funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council. 
Better Food For All
Innovate UK’s Better Food for All programme supports the food sector to innovate in the areas of nutrition and food processing to create affordable, convenient foods with improved nutritional quality.Agri-Tech Catapult
We are continuing to fund the world class facilities and expertise in the UK Agri-Tech Centres. We are working with three of the Centres – Agri-EPI, CEIL and CHAP – to develop a proposal for a new Agri-Tech Catapult. This new merged capability will play a crucial role in accelerating the development and adoption of agri-tech for net zero. Bringing the Centres’ expertise and capabilities into a single entity will provide a centre of excellence for agri-tech businesses and provide leadership and coordination for the sector around innovation opportunities. Current Innovate UK programmes building
investment opportunities
Net Zero Review 2023
Heat
12
Meeting the Sixth Carbon 
Budget’s targets will require the UK’s sector for the retroﬁ  t of buildings to grow tenfold, presenting opportunities for SMEs and investors.
Innovate UK’s net zero heat 
programme supports innovation to develop alternatives to using gas to heat space and water in buildings. In the UK 23% of emissions are related to heat in buildings
7. 
The sector for large-scale retroﬁ  t of buildings needs to grow by a factor of 10 to meet the pathways in the Sixth Carbon Budget. 
Government targets mean a ramp 
up in activity over the next ﬁ  ve years, installing 600,000 heat pumps and upgrading one million homes a year by 2028. The barriers to this scale-up include the current installed cost of retroﬁ  t measures, lack of trained/skilled installers, slow accreditation of innovation and inconsistent or confusing information for building owners.
A cost-effective approach to UK retroﬁ  t could deliver 
a net present value of £7.5 billion8
This approach could realise additional economic value of up to £47 billion from system beneﬁ  ts and economic activity in the supply chain
8
66,000-86,000 new jobs could be sustained annually across all UK regions if this approach were adopted
8
The global energy retroﬁ  t systems market size was valued at $150 billion in 2022 and is anticipated to grow at a CAGR of 6.3% from 2022 to 2030
9£7.5 bn HeatNet Zero Review 2023
13
Heat
Private investment
raised
£100 millionKensa Group is responsible for the manufacture and installation of ground-source heat pumps and the ownership of associated 
underground infrastructure.The company deployed its heat pump solutions alongside grid-scale energy storage and the largest hybrid battery for EV charging points as part of the Energy Superhub Oxford demonstrator project.
£22 millionSunamp develops thermal energy storage devices. Innovate UK have awarded grants to Sunamp to improve the efﬁ  ciency of its thermal energy storage devices and explore broader zero emission applications for their use. 
£16 millionMixergy designs and manufactures hot water tanks. Innovate UK has awarded 4 grants to Mixergy since 2015 for projects aiming to integrate renewable energy into household supply.
£15 millionTepeo develops a zero-carbon emissions boiler aimed at providing a more efﬁ  cient alternative to traditional electrical heating systems. Innovate UK supported the company’s project in 2021 to develop a scalable manufacturing blueprint for the Zero Emissions Boiler.
£15 millionArbnco develops web-based software that enables real estate managers to analyse and reduce energy consumption across their property portfolio. Since 2017, Innovate UK have funded 5 Arbnco projects, focusing on improving energy monitoring and management for large estates and developing envelope systems for future buildings. 
*Total private investment in companies receiving Innovate UK grants since 2018, selected examples.
Innovate UK funded companies go on to raise signifi  cant 
private investment*
Net Zero Review 2023
14
Heat
BUILDING FABRIC
MAINTENANCE AND DATADEMAND AGGREGATION
HEATING SYSTEMS AND INTEGRATED RENEWABLES
* Selected organisations receiving Innovate UK grants in FY 2022/23.Innovate UK is funding companies across the value chain*Net Zero Review 2023
15
Heat
Innovate UK’s net zero heat programme focuses on interventions that 
address the following areas.
Market demand
The programme takes a data-led approach to providing standardised information on what building upgrade to do where and when for maximum impact. This includes compiling a uniﬁ  ed national stock model for the UK, developing pathways for large-scale retroﬁ  t that take the power network into account and faster, lower-cost solutions to do real-time measurements of building fabric efﬁ  ciency.
System barriers
We seek to understand and provide support to overcome the systemic barriers to scaling out of existing innovative solutions, building capacity and growing supply chains. This includes growing the Net Zero Heat Cohort (see below) and providing investor partnerships.
Design engineering
We are reducing capital and installation costs across the system of net zero renovation (including fabric improvements, decarbonised heating technologies and installation methods) through cross-sector innovation involving construction, high-value manufacturing, digital, robotics, design and energy. During 2023 this will be achieved by running an Innovation Lab bringing together such experts to develop novel projects that rethink net zero heat upgrades to be lower cost and ready to industrialise. 
Net Zero Heat Cohort
The technology to deliver net zero heat largely exists, and Innovate UK has supported many of the solutions now on the market. However, these companies and supply chains haven’t scaled due to system barriers. The Net Zero Heat Cohort is tackling these barriers collectively with our cohort delivery partners, Sustainable Ventures and CarbonLimiting Technologies. Over the last year the cohort has connected with emerging demand aggregators, explored issues in insurance and worked on the largest current barrier, accreditation onto government retroﬁ  t schemes. On behalf of the cohort, Innovate UK, alongside the Energy Systems Catapult and the Sustainable Energy Association, is working with key accrediting bodies accrediting bodies and UK government to provide a smoother and faster process for innovative solutions to be accredited. Current Innovate UK programmes 
building investment opportunitiesNet Zero Review 2023
Make
and Use
16Resource and energy 
efﬁ  ciency, rare earth materials and circular economy solutions are providing opportunities for growth in the UK’s manufacturing sector.
UK manufacturing is responsible 
for over 40% of the total emissions associated with the UK’s consumption of goods. Innovate UK is focused on reducing this by helping companies address how products are sourced, made, used and disposed of.
We believe that the UK can become 
a world-class destination of choice for advanced low-carbon manufacturing. Manufacturing sectors are key drivers for  prosperous and sustainable future for the UK.
The Climate Change Committee estimates that, at 314 MtCO2, 
resource and energy efﬁ  ciency in manufacturing is the single largest opportunity to abate carbon up to 2050
10
12 MtCO2 of abatement could be in place by 2030 throughthe development and adoption of digitally-enabled efﬁ  ciency 
Resource efﬁ  ciency measures can improve national resilience 
by increasing the domestic supply of resources and protecting industry from price shocks and supply disruptions
The global market for rare earth elements is projected to grow 
from $2.5bn to $5.5bn by 2028, with a compound annual growth rate of 10.0%
11Net Zero Review 2023
 Make
and Use17Net Zero Review 2023
Make
and Use
Private investment
raised
£143 millionPragmatic manufactures ultra-thin integrated microcircuits for applications in mass-market objects and smart packaging. Since 
2010, Innovate UK has awarded the company grants for projects that aim to decarbonise consumer electronics and increase plastic recycling through smart packaging techniques.
£67 millionParagraf uses graphene to replace rare earth materials in electronic products. Since 2018, Innovate UK has awarded grants to help scale up the use of ‘next generation graphene’ to replace rare conductive materials used in electronic devices.
£58 millionPolyMateria has developed technology that enables it to manufacture recyclable and biodegradable plastic products. Innovate UK has funded projects that aim to develop advanced drop-in additive formulations for the manufacture of compostable, biodegradable and cost-effective plastics.
£34 millionACS Clothing provides formal wear rental services. ACS received Innovate UK grants to make the fashion industry sustainable through new clothing development processes and sustainable supply chains.
£34 millionCornish Lithium explores the potential for lithium mining in Cornwall. The company received grants from Innovate UK to scope the production of enriched lithium at a pilot plant in Cornwall.
*Total private investment in companies receiving Innovate UK grants since 2018, selected examples.
Innovate UK funded companies go on to raise signifi  cant 
private investment*18Net Zero Review 2023
Make
and Use
FOUNDATION INDUSTRIES
SMART SUSTAINABLE PACKAGING
DIGITAL SOLUTIONS
CIRCULAR ECONOMY
DECARBONISED MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION
* Selected organisations receiving Innovate UK grants in FY 2022/23.Innovate UK is funding companies across the value chain*19Net Zero Review 2023
Make
and Use
Our vision is for UK materials and manufacturing in 2050 
to be sustainable, safe, advanced, agile and resilient. We believe the UK will be an increasingly attractive place to manufacture goods with organisations in materials and manufacturing embracing innovation to be:
• net zero and resource efﬁ  cient, understanding the 
environmental impact of every stage in the supply chain and manufacturing process, and widely adopting sustainable practices; 
• resilient and responsive with the agility to mitigate risks 
arising from the changing global economy, interruptions to supply of critical minerals and materials, national and global disruptions, and climate change; 
• technologically advanced and digital to improve 
efﬁ  ciency across supply chains, enable novel business models, support whole-system design and deliver highly customised products.
The following programmes are designed to help UK businesses achieve their goals.
CLIMATES 
The Circular Critical Materials Supply chains (CLIMATES)programme is aligned to the UK’s Critical Mineral Strategy and will create a more resilient and sustainable UK through the opportunity to build a stronger supply chain of materials for high-performance magnets. The aim is to position the UK as a world leader in rare earth materials recycling and to help meet the UK government’s net zero targets.
Made Smarter Innovation 
The UKRI funded Made Smarter Innovation (MSI) challengesupports businesses and researchers to deliver a resilient, ﬂ  exible, more productive and environmentally sustainable UK manufacturing sector. It aids the transformation of UK manufacturing by pioneering the development and integration of new and existing digital technologies, including artiﬁ  cial intelligence and virtual reality.
NICER 
National Interdisciplinary Circular Economy Research (NICER) aims to grow the circular economy community through a signiﬁ  cant programme of outreach and collaboration. The programme consists of ﬁ  ve resource-ﬂ  ow speciﬁ  c centres, a Circular Economy Hub and collaborative research and development (CR&D) competitions.
REforMM 
Resource Efﬁ  ciency for Materials and Manufacturing (REforMM) aims to put in place the key building blocks to help businesses transform to a resource efﬁ  cient future. This programme aims for UK organisations to understand the impact of the full product lifecycle and to thrive from the development and adoption of resource efﬁ  cient solutions.
Smart Sustainable Plastic Packaging
The Smart Sustainable Plastic Packaging (SSPP) challengesupports groundbreaking research and innovation to make plastic packaging ﬁ  t for a sustainable future. The SSPP challenge is the largest and most ambitious UK government investment to date in sustainable plastics research and innovation, driving cleaner growth across the UK’s plastics, packaging and retail supply chains.
SusBioMM 
Sustainable Bio-Based Materials and Manufacturing (SusBioMM) addresses the challenge of developing innovations in sustainable and scalable biomanufacturing processes. It aims to enable the UK to be more globally competitive by supporting development across different industries and sectors.
Transforming Foundation Industries 
The Transforming Foundation Industries challenge aims to transform the UK’s foundation industries (including cement, metals, glass, paper, ceramics and chemicals) by making them internationally competitive, securing more jobs throughout the UK and growing the sector by 2024 in an environmentally sustainable way.
HVM Catapult 
Innovate UK invests £150 million a year in the High Value Manufacturing (HVM) Catapult. The catapult provides access to leading expertise, and world-class research and development facilities. It is a key partner both for government and industry for advanced manufacturing technologies in the UK.Current Innovate UK programmes building 
investment opportunities
20
Net Zero Review 2023Mobility
The transport sector is 
targeting signiﬁ  cant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions across air, road, rail and maritime modes of transport. 
With Innovate UK’s support, 85% 
of the UK’s road transport will be zero emission by 2040 along with signiﬁ  cant reductions in greenhouse gases in other modes of transport, such as maritime, which has made clear strides towards its pathway for decarbonisation over the last year. 
Innovate UK’s UK Transport Vision 
2050 identiﬁ  es pathways for the energy vectors powering transport, backed up by published reference material and peer review. Using this data, we forecast that 155TWh of electricity, 74TWh of hydrogen and other energy sources will replace nearly 55 million tonnes of petroleum products a year in the UK by 2050.
Percentage of zero emission rail travel by 2040
It is estimated that £75 billion of investment will be 
needed to decarbonise the domestic maritime sector over the next three decades
12
Surface transport GHG emissions were 113MtCO2e in 2019, comprising 22% of total UK GHG emissions
10
Over 85% of road transport will be zero emission by 2040. Greater connectivity and automation will ensure the right mobility method is chosen, used efﬁ  ciently and lasts longer in service90%
113MtCO2e £75 bn Mobility21
Net Zero Review 2023Mobility
Private investment
raised
£650 millionOctopus Electric Vehicles, part of the Octopus Energy Group, offers electric vehicle leasing. In 2018, Innovate UK funded the Powerloop 
- Domestic V2G Demonstrator, a Vehicle to Grid (V2G) project led by Octopus that gives EV users more ﬂ  exibility over the power in their batteries and helps to introduce additional renewable energy into the electricity grid to smartly fulﬁ  l local demand.
£224 millionNexeon develops silicon anodes for lithium-ion batteries, which enable the creation of lighter batteries with more power and longer lifetime between charges. Since 2010, Innovate UK has awarded Nexeon 5 grants support the scale up of battery development for Electric Vehicles.
£210 millionGRIDSERVE delivered EV infrastructure powered by renewable energy solutions including its Electric Highway and Electric Forecourts across the UK. The company developed local transport decarbonisation plans for Warrington as part of the ReWIRE-NW project. 
£185 millionOxa develops software designed to power driverless vehicles, with technology that uses features such as cameras and lasers in order to sense and navigate the surrounding environment. Since 2015 Innovate UK has awarded 13 grants to Oxa to support autonomous vehicle development.
£159 millionReaction Engines has developed a lightweight heat exchanger, which cools hot air, for the aerospace industry. The company is also developing a hybrid rocket and jet engine, together with a spaceplane that can ﬂ  y through space and the Earth’s atmosphere. Since 2011, Reaction Engines has received 10 grants from Innovate UK to develop and scale up power solutions for aerospace mobility.
£158 millionVertical Aerospace develops aerospace technology, specialising in electric aviation for urban air travel. Since 2020, Innovate UK has awarded 6 grants to support the development of electric aviation technologies.
*Total private investment in companies receiving Innovate UK grants since 2018, selected examples.Innovate UK funded companies go on to raise signifi  cant 
private investment*
22
Net Zero Review 2023Mobility
AEROSPACE
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGINGBATTERY DEVELOPMENT
RAIL TRANSPORTMARITIME
NEW AUTOMOTIVE TECHNOLOGIES
* Selected organisations receiving Innovate UK grants in FY 2022/23.
Innovate UK is funding companies across the value chain*23
Net Zero Review 2023Mobility
Transport is fundamental to the daily 
movement, trade and communication of people, organisations and goods across the globe. But transport systems need to rapidly change to deliver against three challenges: achieving net zero, increasing resilience and embracing new technologies.
Our vision is for a 2050 transport system 
that enables the movement of people and goods from one location to another through seamless, safe, net zero, connected, cost effective, accessible and reliable means.
ATI Programme 
Innovate UK coordinates the aerospace  ATI Programme in partnership with the Department for Business and Trade (DBT) and the Aerospace Technology Institute. All three organisations work together to build a portfolio of projects to support the UK’s competitive position in civil aerospace. The programme has invested over £1.6 billion of funding across priority areas including zero-carbon emission aircraft technologies, ultra-efﬁ  cient aircraft technologies and cross-cutting enabling technologies.
Driving the Electric Revolution 
UKRI’s £80 million challenge is investing in electriﬁ  cation technologies, including power electronics, machines and drives (PEMD). The investment will support the UK’s push towards a net zero carbon economy and contribute to the development of clean technology supply chains.Faraday Battery Challenge
The Faraday Battery Challenge continues to invest £541 million to deliver a mission-led research and innovation programme that covers ‘lab to factory’ development, cutting-edge research and national scale-up infrastructure to drive the growth of a strong battery sector in the UK. The new battery technologies we are supporting are cost-effective, high performing, faster charging, long-lasting, safe and recyclable, and have greater range.
Future Flight Challenge
The UKRI Future Flight Challenge is investing £125 million in new classes of electric, hydrogen and autonomous air vehicles that will transform how we connect people, deliver goods and provide services. The challenge will speed up the acceptance of these vehicles into service by encouraging businesses to share knowledge and resources.
Heavy Goods Vehicles
Innovate UK is investing up to £117 million alongside up to £100 million from the Department for Transport (DfT) in zero emission road freight demonstrations, enabling multi-year demonstration of 40-44 tonne electric and hydrogen fuel cell trucks.    Maritime
Innovate UK is delivering multiple investments on behalf of the DfT’s £206 million UK Shipping Ofﬁ  ce for Reducing Emissions (UK SHORE) programme. This includes £80 million invested in Zero Emission Vessels and Infrastructure (ZEVI) and £102 million invested in Clean Maritime Demonstration Competitions.
Rail
Innovate UK will deliver the DfT’s £7.5 million ﬁ  rst-of-a kind demonstrator competition to accelerate innovation in the UK’s rail sector and work with other partners such as Network Rail and HS2. 
Zero Emission Vehicles 
We support DBT and the Advanced Propulsion Centre to focus and deliver their £75 million a year budget, and support the Automotive Transformation Fund’s £25 million a year in transformative R&D. These programmes enable the creation of a world-class eco system and supply chain for zero emission vehicles. 
Connected Places Catapult
Innovate UK invests £20 million a year in the Connected Places Catapult, the UK’s innovation accelerator for cities, transport and place leadership.Current Innovate UK programmes building 
investment opportunities
Innovate UK KTN 
In partnership with Innovate UK KTN, we 
will continue to build communities around key technologies and markets; for example, the Sustainable Aviation Fuel Innovation Programme, which will support the UK’s emerging sustainable aviation fuel supply chain.
24Net Zero Review 2023
Power
Increased demand and 
a transformation of how energy is produced, stored and supplied are opening up opportunities to invest in power.
The energy system is becoming the 
backbone of growth as the economy transforms. Increased demand for electriﬁ  cation is creating fast growing markets with users looking for affordable and sustainable means to power, heat and cool. 
The global transformation of energy 
systems towards a decarbonised and net zero future presents real technical and infrastructure challenges with the introduction and expansion of green generation and fuels.  But there is also an economic opportunity for those who dare to innovate and invest in building a green, secure and resilient system that works for everyone. 
The UK has set a target of 10GW of low carbon 
hydrogen production capacity by 2030, at least half of which will come from electrolytic hydrogen
Battery storage will represent a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of 16% to 2029, reaching more than $30 billion 
Offshore wind will offer a CAGR of 18% to 2030, 
representing a cumulative market of $600 billion
Civil nuclear power will represent a £1.3 trillion 
market by 2035 Power25Net Zero Review 2023
Power
Private investment
raised
£119 millionOxford Photovoltaics develops solid-state dye sensitized solar cells (perovskite cells) that can be printed on glass, such as building 
windows. Since 2010, Innovate UK has awarded the company six grants to advance their solar cell technology.
£77 millionHighview Power designs and develops large-scale energy storage solutions for utility and distributed power systems. The company has received seven grants from Innovate UK since 2012 to support the integration of renewable energy into the energy system.
£61 millionAzuri Technologies supplies solar panel units to individuals in rural Africa, where the costs are recovered using a “pay as you go” system which lasts for 18 months, at the end of which the panel can be upgraded or is free to use. In 2021 they received an Innovate UK grant to support power grid reliability with solar power in Nigeria.
£55 millionProtium develops and implements hydrogen and other renewable energy technologies. Since 2020 Protium Green Solutions has received three grants from Innovate UK to support the development of a hydrogen based sub-regional air transportation network. In 2022 Protium secured over £40 million investment in its latest round, from SWEN Capital Partners and Sustainable Impact Capital.
£40 millionGeoPura was founded to help source enough clean energy to electrify our global economy and navigate the logistical issues of getting this energy to where it is needed. In 2022, GeoPura took part in an Innovate UK funded project to demonstrate a system capable of producing hydrogen from cracked ammonia, which would reduce the storage and distribution costs of the hydrogen supply chain. In 2023, GeoPura secured £36 million in investment to scale its green hydrogen business from GM Ventures, Barclays Sustainable Impact Capital and SWEN Capital Partners.
*Total private investment in companies receiving Innovate UK grants since 2018, selected examples.Innovate UK funded companies go on to raise signifi  cant 
private investment*
26Net Zero Review 2023
Power
ENERGY ACCESS
ENERGY SYSTEMS INTEGRATION
HYDROGEN
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES (WIND, SOLAR, OCEAN)
* Selected organisations receiving Innovate UK grants in FY 2022/23.Innovate UK is funding companies across the value chain*27Net Zero Review 2023
Power
Whole system integration 
Innovate UK is Ofgem’s delivery partner 
for the Strategic Innovation Fund. The fund will accelerate innovation to transition electricity and gas networks to net zero at the lowest cost to consumers. It connects innovators and energy network companies and supports the best ideas towards commercialisation.
Innovate UK funds the energy systems 
catapult to help transform the UK’s energy system and ensure businesses and consumers beneﬁ  t from the transformation.
Hydrogen and CCS
UKRI’s £210 million Industrial Decarbonisation Challenge drives the decarbonisation of the UK’s industrial clusters through the development of low-carbon power, carbon capture and storage and low-carbon hydrogen production.  It has funded large-scale engineering design for projects which are now able to access the £20 billion of support announced in the Spring 2023 budget, while also developing next-generation technologies through the Industrial Decarbonisation and Innovation Centre.
Innovate UK also delivers part of the £240 
million Net Zero Hydrogen Fund, which supports the commercial deployment of low-carbon hydrogen production.In addition, Innovate UK funds the Hydrogen Innovation Initiative to work across industry, government, and academia to create an investible, globally competitive, hydrogen sector in the UK. We have invested in innovative storage and distribution projects to develop the hydrogen supply chain.
Offshore Renewable Energy Catapult
The UK’s leading technology innovation 
and research centre for offshore renewable energy continues to support the industry to tackle key challenges to meet the UK’s 2050 targets. 
It operates key programmes to 
address supply chain development, skills needs, consenting bottlenecks, and component testing and design for next-generation turbines. Nuclear
The Low Cost Nuclear Programme 
is supporting Rolls-Royce SMR Ltd in developing the UK’s ﬁ  rst small modular reactor design to enter the regulatory assessment process.
Energy access
Innovate UK runs the Energy Catalyst and 
ZeGen programmes, which help provide access to clean energy for all across Africa, Asia and Indo-Paciﬁ  c Communities.
Energy Systems Catapult
We invest £12m per year in the Catapult to accelerate the UK to Net Zero by supporting innovators to commercialise, and helping design and deliver the future energy system.
Current Innovate UK programmes building 
investment opportunities28Net Zero Review 2023Decarbonising 
Places
Transforming the places where 
we live, ready for a net zero future, requires more than technology. That’s why Innovate UK is investing directly in net zero ecosystems at the local level to unlock signiﬁ  cant socio-economic growth and value. 
To maximise the net zero opportunity 
we need to drive demand and adoption of proven net zero solutions in our communities. 
Towns and cities rapidly need to develop 
cross-sector investment pipelines to meet their ambitious net zero targets, many of them well ahead of our national 2050 target. 
To accelerate the development of 
a strong pipeline of investable, local net zero projects Innovate UK is building capacity at the local level to catalyse ﬁ  nancial innovation that can deliver development capital and projectﬁ  nance at scale.Locally-led net zero projects present a market 
investment opportunity of £400 billion
Tailoring action locally delivers twice the socio-
economic beneﬁ  ts at less than a third of the investment cost compared to national action alone
Local net zero delivery accelerates the 
UK’s progress towards our national net zero targets
Access to better at-risk development capital and 
innovative project ﬁ  nance products will unlock investment potential£400 bn Decarbonising
Places29Net Zero Review 2023Decarbonising 
Places
Current Innovate UK programmes building 
investment opportunities
Net Zero Review 2023
Over the last ﬁ  ve years, UKRI’s ﬂ  agship 
place-based net zero programme Prospering from the Energy Revolution has accelerated development of local net zero approaches. 
Participants successfully leveraged 7.5 
times the original grant funding awarded by Innovate UK in 2019. 
However, challenges remain in mobilising 
private sector capital into high-risk, city-scale projects:
1.  Lack of a mature, investable local project 
pipeline held back by local capacity, 
development capital constraints and uncertain demand
2.  A policy and regulatory environment that 
limits access to revenue streams
3.  A disconnect between local developers 
and the investment community.
Innovate UK’s place-based programmes will start to address some of these challenges to unlock investment at scale.
Net Zero Living
The Net Zero Living programme will equip local actors with the skills and capabilities needed to accelerate local pipeline development and unlock the £400 billion investment opportunity that local net zero delivery offers.The programme will drive demand for net zero solutions across 51 places in the UK, funding local authorities all at different stages of their net zero journey. It will provide targeted technical assistance across the areas of visioning and citizen engagement, planning, policy and regulation, ﬁ  nance, and digital, and help investors navigate the complexity of local net zero delivery while connecting them with local project developers. 
Innovate UK Launchpads
This innovation cluster development programme aims to ensure more places in the UK host world-leading and globally-connected innovation clusters, creating more jobs, growth and productivity in those areas to develop a more robust pipeline of investible projects and businesses.
Net Zero Launchpad in Tees Valley was the 
ﬁ  rst of two pilots launched in 2022. The launchpad will provide innovation funding and wrap around support to local businesses working in areas such as hydrogen, carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS), offshore engineering, materials and processing, and the circular economy.Decarbonising Industrial Clusters
UKRI’s Industrial Decarbonisation Challenge have funded major industrial clusters to develop decarbonisation plans. These cover a range of new technologies (e.g. hydrogen production, CCS and electriﬁ  cation). This puts these clusters in a strong position to 
scale solutions in their areas.30Net Zero Review 2023Decarbonising 
Places
12
1716 151413121110
9754
36
850
494847
46
4544
43
4241
4039
38373635
343332
313029
28
272625
24
23201819
21
22Net Zero Living Places Places funded to accelerate local net zero project pipelines, unlocking barriers to investment and delivery
Combairie Nan Eilean siar: Outer Hebrides Net Zero Foundations
Aquatera Limited (Orkney Islands Council): Orkney Pioneer ProjectBelfast City Council: Net Zero BelfastMid and east antrim borough council: Mid and East Antrim Net Zero Business 
(MEANZ Business)
Armagh City Banbridge & Craigavon Borough Council: Driving Net Zero 
transformation of Mid South West region in Northern Ireland
Derry city & strabane district council: Net Zero - Derry & Strabane - 
From Ambition to Action
South Lakeland District Council: Net Zero and Rurality: Feasibility Study into 
a Cross-Sectoral, Place-Based Approach to Overcoming Non-Technical Barriers to Net-Zero Living in South Lakeland, Cumbria
Blackpool Council: Co-operative Heat NetworkNew Resource Partners Limited (Liverpool City Council) - Liverpool Net Zero 
Delivery Plan for Liverpool: Breaking Down Systemic Barriers
Rossendale Borough Council: Rossendale Net Zero Terraced StreetWarrington Borough Council: Warrington Carbon CultureGwynedd Council - Bethesda/Blaenau: Breaking Barriers to Bethesda 
& Blaenau Being Net Zero
Birmingham City Council: Net Zero Transition for Businesses in East BirminghamWest Midlands COmbined Authority - Dudley West Midlands 
Combined Authority: Creating a Market for Place-based Outcomes (CAMPOS)
Oxford City Council - Oxford City: FutureFit One Stop Shop (FOSS)Forest of Dean District Council: Forest of Dean Fast Followers (F3)Caerphilly County Borough Council - Caerphilly: Net Zero Caephilly Whole 
System Decision Support Toolkil (NetZeroCaer)
Cardiff Council Behavior Change - Lets Go Net Zero Bristol City Council: Bristol Mission Net ZeroSouthampton City Council: Pioneering Net Zero Delivery for 
The City of Southampton
Devon County Council: Financing Net ZeroPlymouth City Council: Plymouth Owning Net-ZeroFuture Isle of Wight CIC (Isle of Wight Council): PIOW-NZ Pioneers 
Isle of  Wight Net Zero
Runnymede Borough Council: Runnymede’s Runway to Net ZeroPortsmouth City Council: Decarbonising Portsmouth City IslandSouth Downs National Park Authority - Lewes: South Downs National Park:
Pioneer Parks Modelling a Common Framework to Track and Accelate Progress Towards Net Zero in National Parks Using the One Planet Platform
Energypro Limited (Surrey County Council, the Kent County Council, Essex 
Country Council, Brighton & Hove Ciry Council: Shift to Net Zero
London Borough of Lambeth: Net Zero Transition LambethSt Albans City and District Council: St Albans 
Greener Together
London Borough Of Haringey: Upskilling Domestric Retroﬁ  t - HarringeyWestmister City Council: Westminster Retroﬁ  t TaskforceEssex County Council - Chelmsford: Essex
Net Zero Delivery Taskforce (EssNet)
London Borough of Newham: green Economy TransitionThree Rivers District Council: Advancing Retroﬁ  t to Drive Net
Zero in Three Rivers
Cambridgeshire County Council - Huntingdon:  Cambridgeshire 
Net Zero Financing Framework for Whole System Change (CANFFUND) 
Great Yarmouth Borough Council: Norfolk Climate CHange Partnershp 
(NCCO) Project: Clean Growth & Citizen Preparedness
Peterborough City Council:  Peterborough Accelerate Net Zero (PANZ)Nottingham City Council: CO-Country Carbon Coordination; a coordinated 
approach to achieving Net Zero at scale
Manchester City Council - Wythenshawe: Net Zero Pinoneer - ManchesterLeicestershire County Council: Leicestershire CAN (Collaboration to Accelerate 
Net zero): A Framework for Cross-Sector Decision Making, Governance andDelivery to Enable and Accelerate Net Zero Action
The Council of the City of Wakeﬁ  eld: Embedding Net Zero in Wakeﬁ  eldOldham Metropolitan Borough Council: Oldham Green New Deal Delivery 
Partnership
City of York Council: Accelerating York’s Net Zero TransitionGateshead Council: Engaging Gateshead with Zero Carbon HeatCalderdale Borough Council: Power CalderdaleGreater Manchester Combined Authority, City Wide: LAEP to Net Zero - GMCAAdvanced Infrastructure Technology Ltd (Dundee City Council) Perth & Kinross Council: Perth Dialogue to Speed Transition to Net ZeroFife Council: Edinburgh and South East Scotland City Region Deal Net Zero 
Innovation and Delivery Programme
Shetland Islands Council: Shetland Rural Energy Hub2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
171
22
23
24
2526
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
5018
19
20
2131
Net Zero Review 2023Invest for
impact
Innovate UK is committed to 
understanding and improving the effectiveness of its net zero programmes.
Evaluation
A robust, independent and open evidence base helps us to ensure we are getting value for money from our public funding. At Innovate UK we measure the outcomes of innovation that align with our strategic goals, yielding economic beneﬁ  t for the businesses and innovators we support, as well as for the UK as a whole. 
Evaluation is a key part of this evidence 
base, complementing ongoing performance and impact monitoring activities; for example, through our Impact Management Framework. Evaluation and impact management enable us to consider the effects of our activities and incorporate what we learn into the design and delivery of our future programmes.
Our approach to evaluation closely 
follows the principles of the HM Treasury 
Magenta Book, and is described further in the Innovate UK evaluation framework.Measuring the effects of net zero
Measuring the impact of innovation programmes is notoriously difﬁ  cult. Innovation can lead to improvements in business performance, but this generally happens over long timeframes. There is often a high level of uncertainty about when and where the beneﬁ  ts of innovation will manifest.  
While net zero innovation is expected 
to lead to greater economic beneﬁ  ts, its evaluation has the added complexity of understanding the effect of new solutions on environmental metrics that demonstrate our progress in achieving net zero emissions by 2050.
To ensure that we can measure the 
impact of our net zero programmes, we are implementing a multi-phase evaluation project within Innovate UK. The key milestones of the evaluation include assessing net zero projects on reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the UK, increasing economic performance, inﬂ  uencing business level innovation and enabling commercialisation. Invest for 
impact
Measuring the impact of Innovate 
UK funding and its place in the net zero innovation ecosystem.32References
1. Grant values, number of companies and grants are taken 
from Innovate UK data of Net Zero projects with a start date 
between 1 April 2022 and 31 March 2023. Data on Innovate UK funded projects can be found here: https://www.ukri.org/publications/innovate-uk-funded-projects-since-2004/ 
2. Jobs, Investment and Export ﬁ  gures are aggregated from 
the ﬁ  nancial statements of companies who have received an Innovate UK grant for Net Zero projects starting between 1 April 2018 and 31 March 2023. Employment, investment and export data is provided by https://platform.beauhurst.com/
3. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. 
Agriculture in the UK 2021. 2022. Available from: www.gov.uk/government/statistics/agriculture-in-the-united-kingdom-2021
4. The Waste and Resources Action Programme. UK Food 
System GHG Emissions. 2021. Available from: https://wrap.org.uk/resources/report/uk-food-system-ghg-emissions
5. The Waste and Resources Action Programme. Tracking 
UK Food System Greenhouse Gas Emissions: 2022. 2022. Available from: https://wrap.org.uk/resources/report/tracking-uk-food-system-greenhouse-gas-emissions-2022-update
6. Innovate UK KTN. Net Zero Emissions in Agriculture. 2020. 
Available from: https://ktn-uk.org/news/net-zero-emissions-in-agriculture
7. Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. Heat 
and Buildings Strategy. 2021. Available from: www.gov.uk/government/publications/heat-and-buildings-strategy8. UK Parliament. Energy Efﬁ  ciency: Building Towards Net Zero. 
2019. Available from: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/cmbeis/1730/173004.htm
9. Grand View Research. Energy Retroﬁ  t Systems Market Size 
& Share Report. 2021. Available from: www.grandviewresearch.
com/industry-analysis/energy-retroﬁ  ts-systems-market
10. Climate Change Committee. Sixth Carbon Budget. 2020. 
Available from: www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth-carbon-budget
11. Fortune Business Insights. Rare Earth Elements Market Size, 
Share & COVID-19 Impact Analysis. 2021. Available from: www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/rare-earth-elements-market-102943
12. Marine Capital. Launch of UK Maritime Decarbonisation 
Report. 2022. Available from: www.marine-capital.co.uk/ukmaritimedecarbonisationreport
13. UK Research and Innovation. Accelerating Net Zero Delivery. 
2022. Available from: https://iuk.ktn-uk.org/perspectives/accelerating-net-zero-delivery-unlocking-the-beneﬁ  ts-of-climate-action-in-uk-city-regions/Net Zero Review 202310070.0923